_Gangrene_ may ensue if the blood supply is seriously interfered with,
or the signs of _ischaemia_ may develop; the muscles lose their
elasticity, become hard and paralysed, and anaesthesia of the "glove" or
"stocking" type, with other alterations of sensation ensue. Apart from
ischaemia, _reflex paralysis_ of motion and sensation of a transient kind
may follow injury of a large vessel.
_Treatment_ is carried out on the same lines as for similar injuries due
to other causes.
INJURIES OF VEINS
Veins are subject to the same forms of injury as arteries, and the
results are alike in both, such variations as occur being dependent
partly on the difference in their anatomical structure, and partly on
the conditions of the circulation through them.
#Subcutaneous rupture# of veins occur most frequently in association
with fractures and in the reduction of dislocations. The veins most
commonly ruptured are the popliteal, the axillary, the femoral, and the
subclavian. On account of the smaller amount of elastic and muscular
tissue in the wall of a vein, the contraction and retraction of its
walls are less than in an artery, and so bleeding may continue for a
longer period. On the other hand, owing to the lower blood-pressure the
outflow goes on more slowly, and the gradually increasing pressure
produced by the extravasated blood is usually sufficient to arrest the
haemorrhage before it becomes serious. As an aid in diagnosing the source
of the bleeding, it should be remembered that the rupture of a vein does
not affect the pulsation in the limb beyond. The risks are practically
the same as when an artery is ruptured, excepting that of aneurysm, and
the treatment is carried out on the same lines, but it is seldom
necessary to operate for the purpose of applying a ligature to the
injured vein.

#Wounds# of veins--punctured and incised--frequently occur in the course
of operations; for example, in the removal of tumours or diseased glands
from the neck, the axilla, or the groin. They are also met with as a
result of accidental stabs and of suicidal or homicidal injuries. The
haemorrhage from a large vein so damaged is usually profuse, but it is
more readily controlled by external pressure than that from an artery.
When a vein is merely punctured, the bleeding may be arrested by
pressure with a pad of gauze, or by a lateral ligature--that is, picking
up the margins of the rent in the wall and securing them with a
ligature without occluding the lumen. In the large veins, such as the
internal jugular, the femoral, or the axillary, it is usually possible
to suture the opening in the wall. This does not necessarily result in
thrombosis in the vessel, or in obliteration of its lumen.

When an _artery and vein are simultaneously wounded_, the features
peculiar to each are present in greater or less degree. In the limbs
gangrene may ensue, especially if the wound is infected. Punctured and
gun-shot wounds implicating both artery and vein are liable to be
followed by the development of arterio-venous aneurysm.

#Entrance of Air into Veins--Air Embolism.#--This serious, though
fortunately rare, accident is apt to occur in the course of operations
in the region of the thorax, neck, or axilla, if a large vein is opened
and fails to collapse on account of the rigidity of its walls, its
incorporation in a dense fascia, or from traction being made upon it. If
the wound in a vein is thus held open, the negative pressure during
inspiration sucks air into the right side of the heart. This is
accompanied by a hissing or gurgling sound, and with the next expiration
some frothy blood escapes from the wound. The patient instantly becomes
pale, the pupils dilate, respiration becomes laboured, and although the
heart may continue to beat forcibly, the peripheral pulse is weak, and
may even be imperceptible. On auscultating the heart, a churning sound
may be heard. Death may result in a few minutes; or the heart may slowly
regain its power and recovery take place.

_Prevention._--In operations in the "dangerous area"--as the region of
the root of the neck is called in this connection--care must be taken
not to cut or divide any vein before it has been secured by forceps, and
to apply ligatures securely and at once. Deep wounds in this region
should be kept filled with normal salt solution. Immediately a cut is
recognised in a vein, a finger should be placed over the vessel on the
cardiac side of the wound, and kept there until the opening is secured.

_Treatment._--Little can be done after the air has actually entered the
vein beyond endeavouring to maintain the heart's action by hypodermic
injections of ether or strychnin and the application of mustard or hot
cloths over the chest. The head at the same time should be lowered to
prevent syncope. Attempts to withdraw the air by suction, and the
employment of artificial respiration, have proved futile, and are, by
some, considered dangerous. In a desperate case massage of the heart
might be tried.

THE NATURAL ARREST OF HAEMORRHAGE AND THE REPAIR OF BLOOD
VESSELS

#Primary Haemorrhage.#--The term primary haemorrhage is applied to the
bleeding which follows immediately on the wounding of a blood vessel.
The natural process by which such haemorrhage is arrested varies with the
character of the wound in the vessel and may be modified by accidental
circumstances.

(a) _Repair of completely divided Artery._--When an artery is
_completely_ divided, the circular fibres of the muscular coat contract,
so that the lumen of the cut ends is diminished, and at the same time
each segment retracts within its sheath in virtue of the recoil of the
elastic elements in its walls, the tunica intima curls up in the
interior of the vessel, and the tunica externa collapses over the cut
ends. The blood that escapes from the injured vessel fills the
interstices of the tissues, and, coagulating, forms a clot which
temporarily arrests the bleeding. That part of the clot which lies
between the divided ends of the vessel and in the cellular tissue
outside, is known as the _external clot_, while the portion which
projects into the lumen of the vessel is known as the _internal clot_,
and it usually extends as far as the nearest collateral branch. These
processes constitute what is known as the _temporary arrest of
haemorrhage_, which, it will be observed, is effected by the contraction
and retraction of the divided artery and by clotting.

The _permanent arrest_ takes place by the transformation of the clot
into scar tissue. The internal clot plays the most important part in the
process; it becomes invaded by leucocytes and proliferating endothelial
and connective-tissue cells, and new blood vessels permeate the mass,
which is thus converted into granulation tissue. This is ultimately
replaced by fibrous tissue, which permanently occludes the end of the
vessel. Concurrently and by the same process the external clot is
converted into scar tissue.

If a divided artery is _ligated at its cut end_, the tension of the
ligature is usually sufficient to rupture the inner and middle coats,
which curl up within the lumen, the outer coat alone being held in the
grasp of the ligature. An internal clot forms and, becoming organised,
permanently occludes the vessel as above described. The ligature and the
small portion of vessel beyond it are subsequently absorbed.

In course of time the collateral branches of the vessel above and below
the level of section enlarge and their inter-communication becomes more
free, so that even when large trunks have been divided the vascular
supply of the parts beyond may be completely restored. This is known as
the development of the _collateral circulation_.

_Imperfect Collateral Circulation._--While the development of the
collateral circulation after the ligation or obstruction from other
cause of a main arterial trunk may be sufficient to prevent gangrene of
the limb, it may be insufficient for its adequate nourishment; it may be
cold, bluish in colour, and there may be necrosis of the skin over bony
points; this is notably the case in the lower extremity after ligation
of the femoral or popliteal artery, when patches of skin may die over
the prominence of the heel, the balls of the toes, the projecting base
of the fifth metatarsal and the external malleolus.

If, during the period of reaction, the blood-pressure rises

considerably, the occluding clot at the divided end of the vessel may be
washed away or the ligature displaced, permitting of fresh bleeding
taking place--_reactionary_ or _intermediary haemorrhage_ (p. 272).

In the event of the wound becoming infected with pyogenic organisms, the
occluding blood-clot or the young fibrous tissue may become
disintegrated in the suppurative process, and the bleeding start
afresh--_secondary haemorrhage_ (p. 273).

(b) If an artery is only _partly cut across_, the divided fibres of
the tunica muscularis contract and those of the tunica externa retract,
with the result that a more or less circular hole is formed in the wall
of the vessel, from which free bleeding takes place, as the conditions
are unfavourable for the formation of an occluding clot. Even if a clot
does form, when the blood-pressure rises it is readily displaced,
leading to reactionary haemorrhage. Should the wound become infected,
secondary haemorrhage is specially liable to occur. A further risk
attends this form of injury, in that the intra-vascular tension may in
time lead to gradual stretching of the scar tissue which closes the gap
in the vessel wall, with the result that a localised dilatation or
diverticulum forms, constituting a _traumatic aneurysm_.

(c) When the injury merely takes the form of a _puncture_ or _small
incision_ a blood-clot forms between the edges, becomes organised, and
is converted into cicatricial tissue which seals the aperture. Such
wounds may also be followed by reactionary or secondary haemorrhage, or
later by the formation of a traumatic aneurysm.

_Conditions which influence the Natural Arrest of Haemorrhage._--The
natural arrest of bleeding is favoured by tearing or crushing of the
vessel walls, owing to the contraction and retraction of the coats and
the tendency of blood to coagulate when in contact with damaged tissue.
Hence the primary haemorrhage following lacerated wounds is seldom
copious. The occurrence of syncope or of profound shock also helps to
stop bleeding by reducing the force of the heart's action.

On the other hand, there are conditions which retard the natural arrest.
When, for example, a vessel is only partly divided, the contraction and
retraction of the muscular coat, instead of diminishing the calibre of
the artery, causes the wound in the vessel to gape; by completing the
division of the vessel under these circumstances the bleeding can often
be arrested. In certain situations, also, the arteries are so intimately
connected with their sheaths, that when cut across they were unable to
retract and contract--for example, in the scalp, in the penis, and in
bones--and copious bleeding may take place from comparatively small
vessels. This inability of the vessels to contract and retract is met
with also in inflamed and oedematous parts and in scar tissue. Arteries
divided in the substance of a muscle also sometimes bleed unduly. Any
increase in the force of the heart's action, such as may result from
exertion, excitement, or over-stimulation, also interferes with the
natural arrest. Lastly, in bleeders, there are conditions which
interfere with the natural arrest of haemorrhage.

#Repair of a Vessel ligated in its Continuity.#--When a ligature is
applied to an artery it should be pulled sufficiently tight to occlude
the lumen without causing rupture of its coats. It often happens,
however, that the compression causes rupture of the inner and middle
coats, so that only the outer coat remains in the grasp of the ligature.
While this weakens the wall of the vessel, it has the advantage of
hastening coagulation, by bringing the blood into contact with damaged
tissue. Whether the inner and middle coats are ruptured or not, blood
coagulates both above and below the ligature, the proximal clot being
longer and broader than that on the distal side. In small arteries these
clots extend as far as the nearest collateral branch, but in the larger
trunks their length varies. The permanent occlusion of those portions of
the vessel occupied by clot is brought about by the formation of
granulation tissue, and its replacement by cicatricial tissue, so that
the occluded segment of the vessel is represented by a fibrous cord. In
this process the coagulum only plays a passive role by forming a
scaffolding on which the granulation tissue is built up. The ligature
surrounding the vessel, and the elements of the clot, are ultimately
absorbed.

#Repair of Veins.#--The process of repair in veins is the same as that
in arteries, but the thrombosed area may become canalised and the
circulation through the vessel be re-established.

HAEMORRHAGE IN SURGICAL OPERATIONS

The management of the haemorrhage which accompanies an operation includes
(a) preventive measures, and (b) the arrest of the bleeding.

#Prevention of Haemorrhage.#--Whenever possible, haemorrhage should be
controlled by _digital compression_ of the main artery supplying the
limb rather than by a tourniquet. If efficiently applied compression
reduces the immediate loss of blood to a minimum, and the bleeding from
small vessels that follows the removal of the tourniquet is avoided.
Further, the pressure of a tourniquet has been shown to be a material
factor in producing shock.

In selecting a point at which to apply digital compression, it is
essential that the vessel should be lying over a bone which will furnish
the necessary resistance. The common carotid, for example, is pressed
backward and medially against the transverse process (carotid tubercle)
of the sixth cervical vertebra; the temporal against the temporal
process (zygoma) in front of the ear; and the facial against the
mandible at the anterior edge of the masseter.

In the upper extremity, the subclavian is pressed against the first rib
by making pressure downwards and backwards in the hollow above the
clavicle; the axillary and brachial by pressing against the shaft of the
humerus.

In the lower extremity, the femoral is controlled by pressing in a
direction backward and slightly upward against the brim of the pelvis,
midway between the symphysis pubis and the anterior superior iliac
spine.

The abdominal aorta may be compressed against the bodies of the lumbar
vertebrae opposite the umbilicus, if the spine is arched well forwards
over a pillow or sand-bag, or by the method suggested by Macewen, in
which the patient's spine is arched forwards by allowing the lower
extremities and pelvis to hang over the end of the table, while the
assistant, standing on a stool, applies his closed fist over the
abdominal aorta and compresses it against the vertebral column.
Momburg recommends an elastic cord wound round the body between the
iliac crest and the lower border of the ribs, but this procedure has
caused serious damage to the intestine.

When digital compression is not available, the most convenient and
certain means of preventing haemorrhage--say in an amputation--is by the
use of some form of _tourniquet_, such as the elastic tube of Esmarch or
of Foulis, or an elastic bandage, or the screw tourniquet of Petit.
Before applying any of these it is advisable to empty the limb of blood.
This is best done after the manner suggested by Lister: the limb is held
vertical for three or four minutes; the veins are thus emptied by
gravitation, and they collapse, and as a physiological result of this
the arteries reflexly contract, so that the quantity of blood entering
the limb is reduced to a minimum. With the limb still elevated the
tourniquet is firmly applied, a part being selected where the vessel can
be pressed directly against a bone, and where there is no risk of
exerting injurious pressure on the nerve-trunks. The tourniquet should
be applied over several layers of gauze or lint to protect the skin, and
the first turn of the tourniquet must be rapidly and tightly applied to
arrest completely the arterial flow, otherwise the veins only are
obstructed and the limb becomes congested. In the lower extremity the
best place to apply a tourniquet is the middle third of the thigh; in
the upper extremity, in the middle of the arm. A tourniquet should never
be applied tighter or left on longer than is absolutely necessary.

The screw tourniquet of Petit is to be preferred when it is desired to
intermit the flow through the main artery as in operations for aneurysm.

When a tourniquet cannot conveniently be applied, or when its presence
interferes with the carrying out of the operation--as, for example, in
amputations at the hip or shoulder--the haemorrhage may be controlled by
preliminary ligation of the main artery above the seat of operation--for
instance, the external iliac or the subclavian. For such contingencies
also the steel skewers used by Spence and Wyeth, or a special clamp or
forceps, such as that suggested by Lynn Thomas, may be employed. In the
case of vessels which it is undesirable to occlude permanently, such as
the common carotid, the temporary application of a ligature or clamp is
useful.

#Arrest of Haemorrhage.#--_Ligature._--This is the best means of securing
the larger vessels. The divided vessel having been caught with forceps
as near to its cut end as possible, a ligature of catgut or silk is tied
round it. When there is difficulty in applying a ligature securely, for
example in a dense tissue like the scalp or periosteum, or in a friable
tissue like the thyreoid gland or the mesentery, a stitch should be
passed so as to surround the bleeding vessel a short distance from its
end, in this way ensuring a better hold and preventing the ligature from
slipping.

If the haemorrhage is from a partly divided vessel, this should be
completely cut across to enable its walls to contract and retract, and
to facilitate the application of forceps and ligatures.

_Torsion._--This method is seldom employed except for comparatively
small vessels, but it is applicable to even the largest arteries. In
employing torsion, the end of the vessel is caught with forceps, and the
terminal portion twisted round several times. The object is to tear the
inner and middle coats so that they curl up inside the lumen, while the
outer fibrous coat is twisted into a cord which occludes the end of the
vessel.

_Forci-pressure._--Bleeding from the smallest arteries and from
arterioles can usually be arrested by firmly squeezing them for a few
minutes with artery forceps. It is usually found that on the removal of
the forceps at the end of an operation no further haemorrhage takes
place. By the use of specially strong clamps, such as the angiotribes of
Doyen, large trunks may be occluded by pressure.

_Cautery._--The actual cautery or Paquelin's thermo-cautery is seldom
employed to arrest haemorrhage, but is frequently useful in preventing
it, as, for example, in the removal of piles, or in opening the bowel in
colostomy. It is used at a dull-red heat, which sears the divided ends
of the vessel and so occludes the lumen. A bright-red or a white heat
cuts the vessel across without occluding it. The separation of the
slough produced by the charring of the tissues is sometimes attended
with secondary bleeding.

_Haemostatics_ or _Styptics_.--The local application of haemostatics is
seldom to be recommended. In the treatment of epistaxis or bleeding from
the nose, of haemorrhage from the socket of a tooth, and sometimes from
ulcerating or granulating surfaces, however, they may be useful. All
clots must be removed and the drug applied directly to the bleeding
surface. Adrenalin and turpentine are the most useful drugs for this
purpose.

Haemorrhage from bone, for example the skull, may be arrested by means of
Horsley's aseptic plastic wax. To stop persistent oozing from soft
tissues, Horsley successfully applied a portion of living vascular
tissue, such as a fragment of muscle, which readily adheres to the
oozing surface and yields elements that cause coagulation of the blood
by thrombo-kinetic processes. When examined after two or three days the
muscle has been found to be closely adherent and undergoing
organisation.

#Arrest of Accidental Haemorrhage.#--The most efficient means of
temporarily controlling haemorrhage is by pressure applied with the
finger, or with a pad of gauze, directly over the bleeding point. While
this is maintained an assistant makes digital pressure, or applies a
tourniquet, over the main vessel of the limb on the proximal side of the
bleeding point. A useful _emergency tourniquet_ may be improvised by
folding a large handkerchief _en cravatte_, with a cork or piece of wood
in the fold to act as a pad. The handkerchief is applied round the
limb, with the pad over the main artery, and the ends knotted on the
lateral aspect of the limb. With a strong piece of wood the handkerchief
is wound up like a Spanish windlass, until sufficient pressure is
exerted to arrest the bleeding.

When haemorrhage is taking place from a number of small vessels, its
arrest may be effected by elevation of the bleeding part, particularly
if it is a limb. By this means the force of the circulation is
diminished and the formation of coagula favoured. Similarly, in wounds
of the hand or forearm, or of the foot or leg, bleeding may be arrested
by placing a pad in the flexure and acutely flexing the limb at the
elbow or knee respectively.

#Reactionary Haemorrhage.#--Reactionary or intermediary haemorrhage
is really a recurrence of primary bleeding. As the name indicates, it
occurs during the period of reaction--that is, within the first twelve
hours after an operation or injury. It may be due to the increase in the
blood-pressure that accompanies reaction displacing clots which have
formed in the vessels, or causing vessels to bleed which did not bleed
during the operation; to the slipping of a ligature; or to the giving
way of a grossly damaged portion of the vessel wall. In the scrotum, the
relaxation of the dartos during the first few hours after operation
occasionally leads to reactionary haemorrhage.

As a rule, reactionary haemorrhage takes place from small vessels as a
result of the displacement of occluding clots, and in many cases the
haemorrhage stops when the bandages and soaked dressings are removed. If
not, it is usually sufficient to remove the clots and apply firm
pressure, and in the case of a limb to elevate it. Should the haemorrhage
recur, the wound must be reopened, and ligatures applied to the bleeding
vessels. Douching the wound with hot sterilised water (about 110 o F.),
and plugging it tightly with gauze, are often successful in arresting
capillary oozing. When the bleeding is more copious, it is usually due
to a ligature having slipped from a large vessel such as the external
jugular vein after operations in the neck, and the wound must be opened
up and the vessel again secured. The internal administration of heroin
or morphin, by keeping the patient quiet, may prove useful in preventing
the recurrence of haemorrhage.

#Secondary Haemorrhage.#--The term secondary haemorrhage refers to
bleeding that is delayed in its onset and is due to pyogenic infection
of the tissues around an artery. The septic process causes softening and
erosion of the wall of the artery so that it gives way under the
pressure of the contained blood. The leakage may occur in drops, or as a
rush of blood, according to the extent of the erosion, the size of the
artery concerned, and the relations of the erosion to the surrounding
tissues. When met with as a complication of a wound there is an
interval--usually a week to ten days--between the receipt of the wound
and the first haemorrhage, this time being required for the extension of
the septic process to the wall of the artery and the consequent erosion
of its coats. When secondary haemorrhage occurs apart from a wound, there
is a similar septic process attacking the wall of the artery from the
outside; for example in sloughing sore-throat, the separation of a
slough may implicate the wall of an artery and be followed by serious
and it may be fatal haemorrhage. The mechanical pressure of a fragment of
bone or of a rubber drainage tube upon the vessel may aid the septic
process in causing erosion of the artery. In pre-Listerian days, the
silk ligature around the artery likewise favoured the changes that lead
to secondary haemorrhage, and the interesting observation was often made,
that when the collateral circulation was well established, the leakage
occurred on the _distal_ side of the ligature. While it may happen that
the initial haemorrhage is rapidly fatal, as for example when the
external carotid or one of its branches suddenly gives way, it is quite
common to have one, two or more _warning haemorrhages_ before the leakage
on a large scale, which is rapidly fatal.

The _appearances of the wound_ in cases complicated by secondary
haemorrhage are only characteristic in so far that while obviously
infected, there is an absence of all reaction; instead of frankly
suppurating, there is little or no discharge and the surrounding
cellular tissue and the limb beyond are oedematous and pit on pressure.

The _general symptoms_ of septic poisoning in cases of secondary
haemorrhage vary widely in severity: they may be so slight that the
general health is scarcely affected and the convalescence from an
operation, for example, may be apparently normal except that the wound
does not heal satisfactorily. For example, a patient may be recovering
from an operation such as the removal of an epithelioma of the mouth,
pharynx or larynx and the associated lymph glands in the neck, and be
able to be up and going about his room, when, suddenly, without warning
and without obvious cause, a rush of blood occurs from the mouth or the
incompletely healed wound in the neck, causing death within a few
minutes.

On the other hand, the toxaemia may be of a profound type associated with
marked pallor and progressive failure of strength, which, of itself,
even when the danger from haemorrhage has been overcome, may have a fatal
termination. The _prognosis_ therefore in cases of secondary haemorrhage
can never be other than uncertain and unfavourable; the danger from loss
of blood _per se_ is less when the artery concerned is amenable to
control by surgical measures.

_Treatment._--The treatment of secondary haemorrhage includes the use of
local measures to arrest the bleeding, the employment of general
measures to counteract the accompanying toxaemia, and when the loss of
blood has been considerable, the treatment of the bloodless state.

_Local Measures to arrest the Haemorrhage._--The occurrence of even
slight haemorrhages from a septic wound in the vicinity of a large blood
vessel is to be taken seriously; it is usually necessary to _open up the
wound_, clear out the clots and infected tissues with a sharp spoon,
disinfect the walls of the cavity with eusol or hydrogen peroxide, and
_pack_ it carefully but not too tightly with gauze impregnated with some
antiseptic, such as "bipp," so that, if the bleeding does not recur, it
may be left undisturbed for several days. The packing should if possible
be brought into actual contact with the leaking point in the vessel, and
so arranged as to make pressure on the artery above the erosion. The
dressings and bandage are then applied, with the limb in the attitude
that will diminish the force of the stream through the main artery, for
example, flexion at the elbow in haemorrhage from the deep palmar arch.
Other measures for combating the local sepsis, such as the irrigation
method of Carrel, may be considered.

If the wound involves one of the extremities, it may be useful; and it
imparts confidence to the nurse, and, it may be, to the patient, if a
Petit's tourniquet is loosely applied above the wound, which the nurse
is instructed to tighten up in the event of bleeding taking place.

_Ligation of the Artery._--If the haemorrhage recurs in spite of packing
the wound, or if it is serious from the outset and likely to be critical
if repeated, ligation of the artery itself or of the trunk from which it
springs, at a selected spot higher up, should be considered. This is
most often indicated in wounds of the extremities.

As examples of proximal ligation for secondary haemorrhage may be cited
ligation of the hypogastric artery for haemorrhage in the buttock, of the
common iliac for haemorrhage in the thigh, of the brachial in the upper
arm for haemorrhage from the deep palmar arch, and of the posterior
tibial behind the medial malleolus for haemorrhage from the sole of the
foot.

_Amputation_ is the last resource, and should be decided upon if the
haemorrhage recurs after proximal ligation, or if this has been followed
by gangrene of the limb; it should also be considered if the nature of
the wound and the virulence of the sepsis would of themselves justify
removal of the limb. Every surgeon can recall cases in which a timely
amputation has been the means of saving life.

The _counteraction of the toxaemia_ and the _treatment of the bloodless
state_, are carried out on the usual lines.

#Haemorrhage of Toxic Origin.#--Mention must also be made of haemorrhages
which depend upon infective or toxic conditions and in which no gross
lesion of the vessels can be discovered. The bleeding occurs as an
oozing, which may be comparatively slight and unimportant, or by its
persistence may become serious. It takes place into the superficial
layers of the skin, from mucous membranes, and into the substance of
such organs as the pancreas. Haemorrhage from the stomach and intestine,
attended with a brown or black discoloration of the vomit and of the
stools, is one of the best known examples: it is not uncommonly met with
in infective conditions originating in the appendix, intestine,
gall-bladder, and other abdominal organs. Haemorrhage from the mucous
membrane of the stomach after abdominal operations--apparently also due
to toxic causes and not to the operation--gives rise to the so-called
_post-operative haematemesis_.

#Constitutional Effects of Haemorrhage.#--The severity of the symptoms
resulting from haemorrhage depends as much on the rapidity with which the
bleeding takes place as on the amount of blood lost. The sudden loss of
a large quantity, whether from an open wound or into a serous
cavity--for example, after rupture of the liver or spleen--is attended
with marked pallor of the surface of the body and coldness of the skin,
especially of the face, feet, and hands. The skin is moist with a cold,
clammy sweat, and beads of perspiration stand out on the forehead. The
pulse becomes feeble, soft, and rapid, and the patient is dull and
listless, and complains of extreme thirst. The temperature is usually
sub-normal; and the respiration rapid, shallow, and sighing in
character. Abnormal visual sensations, in the form of flashes of light
or spots before the eyes; and rushing, buzzing, or ringing sounds in the
ears, are often complained of.

In extreme cases, phenomena which have been aptly described as those of
"air-hunger" ensue. On account of the small quantity of blood
circulating through the body, and the diminished haemoglobin content of
the blood, the tissues are imperfectly oxygenated, and the patient
becomes extremely restless, gasping for breath, constantly throwing
about his arms and baring his chest in the vain attempt to breath more
freely. Faintness and giddiness are marked features. The diminished
supply of oxygen to the brain and to the muscles produces muscular
twitchings, and sometimes convulsions. Finally the pupils dilate, the
sphincters relax, and death ensues.

Young children stand the loss of blood badly, but they quickly recover,
as the regeneration of blood takes place rapidly. In old people also,
and especially when they are fat, the loss of blood is badly borne, and
the ill effects last longer. Women, on the whole, stand loss of blood
better than men, and in them the blood is more rapidly re-formed. A few
hours after a severe haemorrhage there is usually a leucocytosis of from
15,000 to 30,000.

#Treatment of the Bloodless State.#--The patient should be placed in a
warm, well-ventilated room, and the foot of the bed elevated. Cardiac
stimulants, such as strychnin or alcohol, must be judiciously
administered, over-stimulation being avoided. The inhalation of oxygen
has been found useful in relieving the urgent symptoms of dyspnoea.

The blood may be emptied from the limbs into the vessels of the trunk,
where it is more needed, by holding them vertically in the air for a few
minutes, and then applying a firm elastic bandage over a layer of cotton
wool, from the periphery towards the trunk.

_Introduction of Fluids into the Circulation._--The most valuable
measure for maintaining the circulation, however, is by transfusion of
blood (_Op. Surg._, p. 37). If this is not immediately available the
introduction of from one to three pints of physiological salt
solution (a teaspoonful of common salt to a pint of water) into a vein,
or a 6 per cent. solution of gum acacia, is a useful expedient. The
solution is sterilised by boiling, and cooled to a temperature of about
105 o F. The addition of 5 to 10 minims of adrenalin solution (1 in 1000)
is advantageous in raising the blood-pressure (_Op. Surg._, p. 565).

When the intra-venous method is not available, one or two pints of
saline solution with adrenalin should be slowly introduced into the
rectum, by means of a long rubber tube and a filler. Satisfactory,
although less rapidly obtained results follow the introduction of saline
solution into the cellular tissue--for example, under the mamma, into
the axilla, or under the skin of the back.

If the patient can retain fluids taken by the mouth--such as hot coffee,
barley water, or soda water--these should be freely given, unless the
injury necessitates operative treatment under a general anaesthetic.

Transfusion of blood is most valuable as _a preliminary to operation_ in
patients who are bloodless as a result of haemorrhage from gastric and
duodenal ulcers, and in bleeders.


HAEMOPHILIA

The term haemophilia is applied to an inherited disease which renders the
patient liable to serious haemorrhage from even the most trivial
injuries; and the subjects of it are popularly known as "bleeders."

The cause of the disease and its true nature are as yet unknown. There
is no proof of any structural defect in the blood vessels, and beyond
the fact that there is a diminution in the number of blood-plates, it
has not been demonstrated that there is any alteration in the
composition of the blood.

The affection is in a marked degree hereditary, all the branches of an
affected family being liable to suffer. Its mode of transmission to
individuals, moreover, is characteristic: the male members of the stock
alone suffer from the affection in its typical form, while the tendency
is transmitted through the female line. Thus the daughters of a father
who is a bleeder, whilst they do not themselves suffer from the disease,
transmit the tendency to their male offspring. The sons, on the other
hand, neither suffer themselves nor transmit the disease to their
children (Fig. 64). The female members of a haemophilic stock are often
very prolific, and there is usually a predominance of daughters in their
families.

The disease is met with in boys who are otherwise healthy, and usually
manifests itself during the first few years of life. In rare instances
profuse haemorrhage takes place when the umbilical cord separates. As a
rule the first evidence is the occurrence of long-continued and
uncontrollable bleeding from a comparatively slight injury, such as the
scratch of a pin, the extraction of a tooth, or after the operation of
circumcision. The blood oozes slowly from the capillaries; at first it
appears normal, but after flowing for some days, or it may be weeks, it
becomes pale, thin, and watery, and shows less and less tendency to
coagulate.

Female members of haemophilia families sometimes show a tendency to
excessive haemorrhage, but they seldom manifest the characteristic
features met with in the male members.

Sometimes the haemorrhage takes place apparently spontaneously from the
gums, the nasal or the intestinal mucous membrane. In other cases the
bleeding occurs into the cellular tissue under the skin or mucous
membrane, producing large areas of ecchymosis and discoloration. One of
the commonest manifestations of the disease is the occurrence of
haemorrhage into the cavities of the large joints, especially the knee,
elbow, or hip. The patient suffers repeatedly from such haemorrhages, the
determining injury being often so slight as to have passed unobserved.

There is evidence that the tendency to bleed is greater at certain times
than at others--in some cases showing almost a cyclical
character--although nothing is known as to the cause of the variation.

After a severe haemorrhage into the cellular tissue or into a joint, the
patient becomes pale and anaemic, the temperature may rise to 102 o or
103 o F., the pulse become small and rapid, and haemic murmurs are
sometimes developed over the heart and large arteries. The swelling is
tense, fluctuating, and hot, and there is considerable pain and
tenderness.

In exceptional cases, blisters form over the seat of the effusion, or
the skin may even slough, and the clinical features may therefore come
to simulate closely those of an acute suppurative condition. When the
skin sloughs, an ulcer is formed with altered blood-clot in its floor
like that seen in scurvy, and there is a remarkable absence of any
attempt at healing.

The acute symptoms gradually subside, and the blood is slowly absorbed,
the discoloration of the skin passing through the same series of changes
as occur after an ordinary bruise. The patients seldom manifest the
symptoms of the bloodless state, and the blood is rapidly regenerated.

The _diagnosis_ is easy if the patient or his friends are aware of the
family tendency to haemorrhage and inform the doctor of it, but they are
often sensitive and reticent regarding the fact, and it may only be
elicited after close investigation. From the history it is usually easy
to exclude scurvy and purpura. Repeated haemorrhages into a joint may
result in appearances which closely simulate those of tuberculous
disease. Recent haemorrhages into the cellular tissue often present
clinical features closely resembling those of acute cellulitis or
osteomyelitis. A careful examination, however, may reveal ecchymoses on
other parts of the body which give a clue to the nature of the
condition, and may prevent the disastrous consequences that may follow
incision.

These patients usually succumb sooner or later to haemorrhage, although
they often survive several severe attacks. After middle life the
tendency to bleed appears to diminish.

_Treatment._--As a rule the ordinary means of arresting haemorrhage are
of little avail. From among the numerous means suggested, the following
may be mentioned: The application to the bleeding point of gauze soaked
in a 1 in 1000 solution of adrenalin; prolonged inhalation of oxygen;
freezing the part with a spray of ethyl-chloride; one or more
subcutaneous injections of gelatin--5 ounces of a 2 1/2 per cent.
solution of white gelatin in normal salt solution being injected at a
temperature of about 100 o F.; the injection of pituitary extract. The
application of a pad of gauze soaked in the blood of a normal person
sometimes arrests the bleeding.

To prevent bleeding in haemophilics, intra-venous or subcutaneous
injections of fresh blood serum, taken from the human subject, the
sheep, the dog, or the horse, have proved useful. If fresh serum is not
available, anti-diphtheritic or anti-tetanic serum or trade
preparations, such as hemoplastin, may be employed. We have removed the
appendix and amputated through the thigh in haemophilic subjects without
excessive loss of blood after a course of fresh sheep's serum given by
the mouth over a period of several weeks.

The chloride and lactate of calcium, and extract of thymus gland have
been employed to increase the coagulability of the blood. The patient
should drink large quantities of milk, which also increases the
coagulability of the blood. Monro has observed remarkable results from
the hypodermic injection of emetin hydrochloride in  1/2-grain doses.


THROMBOSIS AND EMBOLISM

The processes known as thrombosis and embolism are so intimately
associated with the diseases of blood vessels that it is convenient to
define these terms in the first instance.

#Thrombosis.#--The term _thrombus_ is applied to a clot of blood formed
in the interior of the heart or of a blood vessel, and the process by
which such a clot forms is known as _thrombosis_. It would appear that
slowing or stagnation of the blood-stream, and interference with the
integrity of the lining membrane of the vessel wall, are the most
important factors determining the formation of the clot. Alterations in
the blood itself, such as occur, for example, in certain toxaemias, also
favour coagulation. When the thrombus is formed slowly, it consists of
white blood cells with a small proportion of fibrin, and, being
deposited in successive layers, has a distinctly laminated appearance on
section. It is known as a _white thrombus_ or laminated clot, and is
often met with in the sac of an aneurysm (Fig. 72). When rapidly formed
in a vessel in which the blood is almost stagnant--as, for example, in a
pouched varicose vein--the blood coagulates _en masse_, and the clot
consists of all the elements of the blood, constituting a _red thrombus_
(Fig. 66). Sometimes the thrombus is _mixed_--a red thrombus being
deposited on a white one, it may be in alternate layers.

When aseptic, a thrombus may become detached and be carried off in the
blood-stream as an embolus; it may become organised; or it may
degenerate and undergo calcification. Occasionally a small thrombus
situated behind a valve in a varicose vein or in the terminal end of a
dilated vein--for example in a pile--undergoes calcification, and is
then spoken of as a _phlebolith_; it gives a shadow with the X-rays.

When infected with pyogenic bacteria, the thrombus becomes converted
into pus and a localised abscess forms; or portions of the thrombus may
be carried as emboli in the circulation to distant parts, where they
give rise to secondary foci of suppuration--pyaemic abscesses.

#Embolism.#--The term _embolus_ is applied to any body carried along in
the circulation and ultimately becoming impacted in a blood vessel. This
occurrence is known as _embolism_. The commonest forms of embolus are
portions of thrombi or of fibrinous formations on the valves of the
heart, the latter being usually infected with micro-organisms.

Embolism plays an important part in determining one form of gangrene, as
has already been described. Infective emboli are the direct cause of the
secondary abscesses that occur in pyaemia; and they are sometimes
responsible for the formation of aneurysm.

Portions of malignant tumours also may form emboli, and their impaction
in the vessels may lead to the development of secondary growths in
distant parts of the body.

Fat and air embolism have already been referred to.


ARTERITIS

_Pyogenic._--Non-suppurative inflammation of the coats of an artery may
so soften the wall of the vessel as to lead to aneurysmal dilatation. It
is not uncommon in children, and explains the occurrence of aneurysm in
young subjects.

When suppuration occurs, the vessel wall becomes disintegrated and gives
way, leading to secondary haemorrhage. If the vessel ruptures into an
abscess cavity, dangerous bleeding may occur when the abscess bursts or
is opened.

_Syphilitic._--The inflammation associated with syphilis results in
thickening of the tunica intima, whereby the lumen of the vessel becomes
narrowed, or even obliterated--_endarteritis obliterans_. The middle
coat usually escapes, but the tunica externa is generally thickened.
These changes cause serious interference with the nutrition of the parts
supplied by the affected arteries. In large trunks, by diminishing the
elasticity of the vessel wall, they are liable to lead to the formation
of aneurysm.

Changes in the arterial walls closely resembling those of syphilitic
arteritis are sometimes met with in _tuberculous_ lesions.

#Arterio-sclerosis# or #Chronic Arteritis#.--These terms are applied to
certain changes which result in narrowing of the lumen and loss of
elasticity in the arteries. The condition may affect the whole vascular
system or may be confined to particular areas. In the smaller arteries
there is more or less uniform thickening of the tunica intima from
proliferation of the endothelium and increase in the connective tissue
in the elastic lamina--a form of obliterative endarteritis. The
narrowing of the vessels may be sufficient to determine gangrene in the
extremities. In course of time, particularly in the larger arteries,
this new tissue undergoes degeneration, at first of a fatty nature, but
progressing in the direction of calcification, and this is followed by
the deposit of lime salts in the young connective tissue and the
formation of calcareous plates or rings over a considerable area of the
vessel wall. To this stage in the process the term _atheroma_ is
applied. The endothelium over these plates often disappears, leaving
them exposed to the blood-stream.

Changes of a similar kind sometimes occur in the middle coat, the lime
salts being deposited among the muscle fibres in concentric rings.

The primary cause of arterio-sclerosis is not definitely known, but its
almost constant occurrence, to a greater or less degree, in the aged
suggests that it is of the nature of a senile degeneration. It is
favoured by anything which throws excessive strain on the vessel walls,
such as heavy muscular work; by chronic alcoholism and syphilis; or by
such general diseases as tend to raise the blood-pressure--for example,
chronic Bright's disease or gout. It occurs with greater frequency and
with greater severity in men than in women.

Atheromatous degeneration is most common in the large arterial trunks,
and the changes are most marked at the arch of the aorta, opposite the
flexures of joints, at the mouths of large branches, and at parts where
the vessel lies in contact with bone. The presence of diseased patches
in the wall of an artery diminishes its elasticity and favours
aneurysmal dilatation. Such a vessel also is liable to be ruptured by
external violence and so give rise to traumatic aneurysm. Thrombosis is
liable to occur when calcareous plates are exposed in the lumen of the
vessel by destruction of the endothelium, and this predisposes to
embolism. Arterio-sclerosis also interferes with the natural arrest of
haemorrhage, and by rendering the vessels brittle, makes it difficult to
secure them by ligature. In advanced cases the accessible arteries--such
as the radial, the temporal or the femoral--may be felt as firm,
tortuous cords, which are sometimes so hard that they have been aptly
compared to "pipe-stems." The pulse is smaller and less compressible
than normal, and the vessel moves bodily with each pulsation. It must be
borne in mind, however, that the condition of the radial artery may fail
to afford a clue to that of the larger arteries. Calcified arteries are
readily identified in skiagrams (Fig. 65).

[Illustration: FIG. 65.--Radiogram showing Calcareous Degeneration
(Atheroma) of Arteries.]

We have met with a chronic form of arterial degeneration in elderly
women, affecting especially the great vessels at the root of the neck,
in which the artery is remarkably attenuated and dilated, and so friable
that the wall readily tears when seized with an artery-forceps,
rendering ligation of the vessel in the ordinary way well-nigh
impossible. Matas suggests infolding the wall of the vessel with
interrupted sutures that do not pierce the intima, and wrapping it
round with a strip of peritoneum or omentum.

The most serious form of arterial _thrombosis_ is that met with _in the
abdominal aorta_, which is attended with violent pains in the lower
limbs, rapidly followed by paralysis and arrest of the circulation.


THROMBO-PHLEBITIS AND THROMBOSIS IN VEINS

#Thrombosis# is more common in veins than in arteries, because slowing
of the blood-stream and irritation of the endothelium of the vessel wall
are, owing to the conditions of the venous circulation, more readily
induced in veins.

Venous thrombosis may occur from purely mechanical causes--as, for
example, when the wall of a vein is incised, or the vessel included in a
ligature, or when it is bruised or crushed by a fragment of a broken
bone or by a bandage too tightly applied. Under these conditions
thrombosis is essentially a reparative process, and has already been
considered in relation to the repair of blood vessels.

In other cases thrombosis is associated with certain constitutional
diseases--gout, for example; the endothelium of the veins undergoing
changes--possibly the result of irritation by abnormal constituents in
the blood--which favour the formation of thrombi.

Under these various conditions the formation of a thrombus is not
necessarily associated with the action of bacteria, although in any
of them this additional factor may be present.

The most common cause of venous thrombosis, however, is inflammation of
the wall of the vein--phlebitis.

#Phlebitis.#--Various forms of phlebitis are met with, but for practical
purposes they may be divided into two groups--one in which there is a
tendency to the formation of a thrombus; the other in which the
infective element predominates.

In surgical patients, the _thrombotic form_ is almost invariably met
with in the lower extremity, and usually occurs in those who are
debilitated and anaemic, and who are confined to bed for prolonged
periods--for example, during the treatment of fractures of the leg or
pelvis, or after such operations as herniotomy, prostatectomy, or
appendectomy.

_Clinical Features._--The most typical example of this form of phlebitis
is that so frequently met with in the great saphena vein, especially
when it is varicose. The onset of the attack is indicated by a sudden
pain in the lower limb--sometimes below, sometimes above the knee. This
initial pain may be associated with shivering or even with a rigor, and
the temperature usually rises one or two degrees. There is swelling and
tenderness along the line of the affected vein, and the skin over it is
a dull-red or purple colour. The swollen vein may be felt as a firm
cord, with bead-like enlargements in the position of the valves. The
patient experiences a feeling of stiffness and tightness throughout the
limb. There is often oedema of the leg and foot, especially when the limb
is in the dependent position. The acute symptoms pass off in a few days,
but the swelling and tenderness of the vein and the oedema of the limb
may last for many weeks.

When the deep veins--iliac, femoral, popliteal--are involved, there is
great swelling of the whole limb, which is of a firm almost "wooden"
consistence, and of a pale-white colour; the oedema may be so great that
it is impossible to feel the affected vein until the swelling has
subsided. This is most often seen in puerperal women, and is known as
_phlegmasia alba dolens_.

_Treatment._--The patient must be placed at absolute rest, with the foot
of the bed raised on blocks 10 or 12 inches high, and the limb
immobilised by sand-bags or splints. It is necessary to avoid handling
the parts, lest the clot be displaced and embolism occur. To avoid
frequent movement of the limb, the necessary dressings should be kept in
position by means of a many-tailed rather than a roller bandage.

To relieve the pain, warm fomentations or lead and opium lotion should
be applied. Later, ichthyol-glycerin, or glycerin and belladonna, may be
substituted.

When, at the end of three weeks, the danger of embolism is past,
douching and gentle massage may be employed to disperse the oedema; and
when the patient gets up he should wear a supporting elastic bandage.

The _infective_ form usually begins as a peri-phlebitis arising in
connection with some focus of infection in the adjacent tissues. The
elements of the vessel wall are destroyed by suppuration, and the
thrombus in its lumen becomes infected with pyogenic bacteria and
undergoes softening.

_Occlusion of the inferior vena cava_ as a result of infective
thrombosis is a well-known condition, the thrombosis extending into the
main trunk from some of its tributaries, either from the femoral or
iliac veins below or from the hepatic veins above.

Portions of the softened thrombus are liable to become detached and to
enter the circulating blood, in which they are carried as emboli. These
may lodge in distant parts, and give rise to secondary foci of
suppuration--pyaemic abscesses.

_Clinical Features._--Infective phlebitis is most frequently met with in
the transverse sinus as a sequel to chronic suppuration in the mastoid
antrum and middle ear. It also occurs in relation to the peripheral
veins, but in these it can seldom be recognised as a separate entity,
being merged in the general infective process from which it takes
origin. Its occurrence may be inferred, if in the course of a
suppurative lesion there is a sudden rise of temperature, with pain,
redness, and swelling along the line of a venous trunk, and a rapidly
developed oedema of the limb, with pitting of the skin on pressure. In
rare cases a localised abscess forms in the vein and points towards the
surface.

_Treatment._--Attention must be directed towards the condition with
which the phlebitis is associated. Ligation of the vein on the cardiac
side of the thrombus with a view to preventing embolism is seldom
feasible in the peripheral veins, although, as will be pointed out
later, the jugular vein is ligated with this object in cases of
phlebitis of the transverse sinus.


VARIX--VARICOSE VEINS

The term varix is applied to a condition in which veins are so altered
in structure that they remain permanently dilated, and are at the same
time lengthened and tortuous. Two types are met with: one in which
dilatation of a large superficial vein and its tributaries is the most
obvious feature; the other, in which bunches of distended and tortuous
vessels develop at one or more points in the course of a vein, a
condition to which Virchow applied the term _angioma racemosum venosum_.
The two types may occur in combination.

Any vein in the body may become varicose, but the condition is rare
except in the veins of the lower extremity, in the veins of the
spermatic cord (varicocele), and in the veins of the anal canal
(haemorrhoids).

We are here concerned with varix as it occurs in the veins of the lower
extremity.

_Etiology._--Considerable difference of opinion exists as to the
essential cause of varix. The weight of evidence is in favour of the
view that, when dilatation is the predominant element, it results from a
congenital deficiency in the number, size, and strength of the valves of
the affected veins, and in an inherent weakness in the vessel walls.
The _angioma racemosum venosum_ is probably also due to a congenital
alteration in the structure of the vessels, and is allied to tumours of
blood vessels. The view that varix is congenital in origin, as was first
suggested by Virchow, is supported by the fact that in a large
proportion of cases the condition is hereditary; not only may several
members of the same family in succeeding generations suffer from varix,
but it is often found that the same vein, or segment of a vein, is
involved in all of them. The frequent occurrence of varix in youth is
also an indication of its congenital origin.

In the majority of cases it is only when some exciting factor comes into
operation that the clinical phenomena associated with varix appear. The
most common exciting cause is increased pressure within the veins, and
this may be produced in a variety of ways. In certain diseases of the
heart, lungs, and liver, for example, the venous pressure may be so
raised as to cause a localised dilatation of such veins as are
congenitally weak. The direct pressure of a tumour, or of the gravid
uterus on the large venous trunks in the pelvis, may so obstruct the
flow as to distend the veins of the lower extremity. It is a common
experience in women that the signs of varix date from an antecedent
pregnancy. The importance of the wearing of tight garters as a factor in
the production of varicose veins has been exaggerated, although it must
be admitted that this practice is calculated to aggravate the condition
when it is once established. It has been proved experimentally that the
backward pressure in the veins may be greatly increased by straining, a
fact which helps to explain the frequency with which varicosity occurs
in the lower limbs of athletes and of those whose occupation involves
repeated and violent muscular efforts. There is reason to believe,
moreover, that a sudden strain may, by rupturing the valves and so
rendering them incompetent, induce varicosity independently of any
congenital defect. Prolonged standing or walking, by allowing gravity to
act on the column of blood in the veins of the lower limbs, is also an
important determining factor in the production of varix.

Thrombosis of the deep veins--in the leg, for example--may induce marked
dilatation of the superficial veins, by throwing an increased amount of
work upon them. This is to be looked upon rather as a compensatory
hypertrophy of the superficial vessels than as a true varix.

_Morbid Anatomy._--In the lower extremity the varicosity most commonly
affects the vessels of the great saphena system; less frequently those
of the small saphena system. Sometimes both systems are involved, and
large communicating branches may develop between the two.

The essential lesion is the absence or deficiency of valves, so that
they are incompetent and fail to support the column of blood which bears
back upon them. Normally the valves in the femoral and iliac veins and
in the inferior vena cava are imperfectly developed, so that in the
erect posture the great saphena receives a large share of the backward
pressure of the column of venous blood.

The whole length of the vein may be affected, but as a rule the disease
is confined to one or more segments, which are not only dilated, but are
also increased in length, so that they become convoluted. The adjacent
loops of the convoluted vein are often bound together by fibrous tissue.
All the coats are thickened, chiefly by an increased development of
connective tissue, and in some cases changes similar to those of
arterio-sclerosis occur. The walls of varicose veins are often
exceedingly brittle. In some cases the thickening is uniform, and in
others it is irregular, so that here and there thin-walled sacs or
pouches project from the side of the vein. These pouches vary in size
from a bean to a hen's egg, the larger forms being called _venous
cysts_, and being most commonly met with in the region of the saphenous
opening and of the opening in the popliteal fascia. Such pouches, being
exposed to injury, are frequently the seat of thrombosis (Fig. 66).

[Illustration: FIG. 66.--Thrombosis in Tortuous and Pouched Great
Saphena Vein, in longitudinal section.]

_Clinical Features._--Varix is most frequently met with between puberty
and the age of thirty, and the sexes appear to suffer about equally.

The amount of discomfort bears no direct proportion to the extent of
the varicosity. It depends rather upon the degree of pressure in the
veins, as is shown by the fact that it is relieved by elevation of the
limb. When the whole length of the main trunk of the great saphena is
implicated, the pressure in the vein is high and the patient suffers a
good deal of pain and discomfort. When, on the contrary, the upper part
of the saphena and its valves are intact, and only the more distal veins
are involved, the pressure is not so high and there is comparatively
little suffering. The usual complaint is of a sense of weight and
fulness in the limb after standing or walking, sometimes accompanied by
actual pain, from which relief is at once obtained by raising the limb.
Cramp-like pains in the muscles are often associated with varix of the
deep veins.

The dilated and tortuous vein can be readily seen and felt when the
patient is examined in the upright posture. In advanced cases, bead-like
swellings are sometimes to be detected over the position of the valves,
and, on running the fingers along the course of the vessel, a firm
ridge, due to periphlebitis, may be detected on each side of the vein.
When the limb is oedematous, the outline of the veins is obscured, but
they can be identified on palpation as gutter-like tracks. When large
veins are implicated, a distinct impulse on coughing may be seen to pass
down as far as the knee; and if the vessel is sharply percussed a fluid
wave may be detected passing both up and down the vein.

If the patient is placed on a couch and the limb elevated, the veins are
emptied, and if pressure is then made over the region of the saphenous
opening and the patient allowed to stand up, so long as the great
saphena system alone is involved, the veins fill again very slowly from
below. If the small saphena system also is involved, and if
communicating branches are dilated, the veins fill up from below more
rapidly. When the pressure over the saphenous opening is removed, the
blood rapidly rushes into the varicose vessels from above; this is known
as Trendelenburg's test.

The most marked dilatation usually occurs on the medial side of the
limb, between the middle of the thigh and the middle of the calf, the
arrangement of the veins showing great variety (Fig. 67).

There are usually one or more bunches of enlarged and tortuous veins in
the region of the knee. Frequently a large branch establishes a
communication between the systems of the great and small saphenous veins
in the region of the popliteal space, or across the front of the upper
part of the tibia. The superficial position of this last branch and its
proximity to the bone render it liable to injury.

[Illustration: FIG. 67.--Extensive Varix of Internal Saphena System on
Left Leg, of many years' standing.]

The small veins of the skin of the ankle and foot often show as fine
blue streaks arranged in a stellate or arborescent manner, especially in
women who have borne children.

_Complications._--When the varix is of long standing, the skin in the
lower part of the leg sometimes assumes a mahogany-brown or bluish hue,
as a result of the _deposit of blood pigment_ in the tissues, and this
is frequently a precursor of ulceration.

_Chronic dermatitis_ (_varicose eczema_) is often met with in the lower
part of the leg, and is due to interference with the nutrition of the
skin. The incompetence of the valves allows the pressure in the varicose
veins to equal that in the arterioles, so that the capillary circulation
is impeded. From the same cause the blood in the deep veins is enabled
to enter the superficial veins, where the backward pressure is so great
that the blood flows down again, and so a vicious circle is established.
The blood therefore loses more and more of its oxygen, and so fails to
nourish the tissues.

The _ulcer_ of the leg associated with varicose veins has already been
described.

_Haemorrhage_ may take place from a varicose vein as a result of a wound
or of ulceration of its wall. Increased intra-venous pressure produced
by severe muscular strain may determine rupture of a vein exposed in the
floor of an ulcer. If the limb is dependent, the incompetency of the
valves permits of rapid and copious bleeding, which may prove fatal,
particularly if the patient is intoxicated when the rupture takes place
and no means are taken to arrest the haemorrhage. The bleeding may be
arrested at once by elevating the limb, or by applying pressure directly
over the bleeding point.

_Phlebitis and thrombosis_ are common sequelae of varix, and may prove
dangerous, either by spreading into the large venous trunks or by giving
rise to emboli. The larger the varix the greater is the tendency for a
thrombus to spread upwards and to involve the deep veins. Thrombi
usually originate in venous cysts or pouches, and at acute bends on the
vessel, especially when these are situated in the vicinity of the knee,
and are subjected to repeated injuries--for example in riding.
Phleboliths sometimes form in such pouches, and may be recognised in a
radiogram. In a certain proportion of cases, especially in elderly
people, the occurrence of thrombosis leads to cure of the condition by
the thrombus becoming organised and obliterating the vein.

_Treatment._--At best the treatment of varicose veins is only
palliative, as it is obviously impossible to restore to the vessels
their normal structure. The patient must avoid wearing anything, such as
a garter, which constricts the limb, and any obvious cause of direct
pressure on the pelvic veins, such as a tumour, persistent
constipation, or an ill-fitting truss, should be removed. Cardiac,
renal, or pulmonary causes of venous congestion must also be treated,
and the functions of the liver regulated. Severe forms of muscular
exertion and prolonged standing or walking are to be avoided, and the
patient may with benefit rest the limb in an elevated position for a few
hours each day. To support the distended vessels, a closely woven silk
or worsted stocking, or a light and porous form of elastic bandage,
applied as a puttee, should be worn. These appliances should be put on
before the patient leaves his bed in the morning, and should only be
removed after he lies down at night. In this way the vessels are never
allowed to become dilated. Elastic stockings, and bandages made entirely
of india-rubber, are to be avoided. In early and mild cases these
measures are usually sufficient to relieve the patient's discomfort.

_Operative Treatment._--In aggravated cases, when the patient is
suffering pain, when his occupation is interfered with by repeated
attacks of phlebitis, or when there are large pouches on the veins,
operative treatment is called for. The younger the patient the clearer
is the indication to operate. It may be necessary to operate to enable a
patient to enter one of the public services, even although no symptoms
are present. The presence of an ulcer does not contra-indicate
operation; the ulcer should be excised, and the raw surface covered with
skin grafts, before dealing with the veins.

The _operation of Trendelenburg_ is especially appropriate to cases in
which the trunk of the great saphena vein in the thigh is alone
involved. It consists in exposing three or four inches of the vein in
its upper part, applying a ligature at the upper and lower ends of the
exposed portion, and, after tying all tributary branches, resecting this
portion of the vein.

The procedure of C. H. Mayo is adapted to cases in which it is desirable
to remove longer segments of the veins. It consists in the employment of
special instruments known as "ring-enucleators" or "vein-strippers," by
means of which long portions of the vein are removed through
comparatively small incisions.

An alternative procedure consists in avulsing segments of the vein by
means of Babcock's stylet, which consists of a flexible steel rod, 30
inches in length, with acorn-shaped terminals. The instrument is passed
along the lumen of the segment to be dealt with, and a ligature applied
around the vein above the bulbous end of the stylet enables nearly the
whole length of the great saphena vein to be dragged out in one piece.
These methods are not suitable when the veins are brittle, when there
are pouches or calcareous deposits in their walls, or where there has
been periphlebitis binding the coils together.

Mitchell of Belfast advises exposing the varices at numerous points by
half-inch incisions, and, after clamping the vein between two pairs of
forceps, cutting it across and twisting out the segments of the vein
between adjacent incisions. The edges of the incisions are sutured; and
the limb is firmly bandaged from below upwards, and kept in an elevated
position. We have employed this method with satisfactory results.

The treatment of the complications of varix has already been considered.


ANGIOMA[4]

[4] In the description of angiomas we have followed the teaching of the
late John Duncan.

Tumours of blood vessels may be divided, according to the nature of the
vessels of which they are composed, into the capillary, the venous, and
the arterial angiomas.


CAPILLARY ANGIOMA

The most common form of capillary angioma is the naevus or congenital
telangiectasis.

#Naevus.#--A naevus is a collection of dilated capillaries, the afferent
arterioles and the efferent venules of which often share in the
dilatation. Little is known regarding the _etiology_ of naevi beyond the
fact that they are of congenital origin. They often escape notice until
the child is some days old, but attention is usually drawn to them
within a fortnight of birth. For practical purposes the most useful
classification of naevi is into the cutaneous, the subcutaneous, and the
mixed forms.

_The cutaneous naevus_, "mother's mark," or "port-wine stain," consists
of an aggregation of dilated capillaries in the substance of the skin.
On stretching the skin the vessels can be seen to form a fine network,
or to run in leashes parallel to one another. A dilated arteriole or a
vein winding about among the capillaries may sometimes be detected.
These naevi occur on any part of the body, but they are most frequently
met with on the face. They may be multiple, and vary greatly in size,
some being no bigger than a pin-head, while others cover large areas of
the body. In colour they present every tint from purple to brilliant
red; in the majority there is a considerable dash of blue, especially in
cold weather.

Unlike the other forms of naevi, the cutaneous variety shows little
tendency to disappear, and it is especially persistent when associated
with overgrowth of the epidermis and of the hairs--_naevoid mole_.

The _treatment_ of the cutaneous naevus is unsatisfactory, owing to the
difficulty of removing the naevus without leaving a scar which is even
more disfiguring. Very small naevi may be destroyed by a fine pointed
Paquelin thermo-cautery, or by escharotics, such as nitric acid. For
larger naevi, radium and solidified carbon dioxide ("CO_2 snow") may be
used. The extensive port-wine stains so often met with on the face are
best left alone.

The _subcutaneous naevus_ is comparatively rare. It constitutes a
well-defined, localised tumour, which may possess a distinct capsule,
especially when it has ceased to grow or is retrogressing. On section,
it presents the appearance of a finely reticulated sponge.

Although it may be noticed at, or within a few days of, birth, a
subcutaneous naevus is often overlooked, especially when on a covered
part of the body, and may not be discovered till the patient is some
years old. It forms a rounded, lobulated swelling, seldom of large size
and yielding a sensation like that of a sponge; the skin over it is
normal, or may exhibit a bluish tinge, especially in cold weather. In
some cases the tumour is diminished by pressing the blood out of it, but
slowly fills again when the pressure is relaxed, and it swells up when
the child struggles or cries. From a cold abscess it is diagnosed by the
history and progress of the swelling and by the absence of fluctuation.
When situated over one of the hernial openings, it closely simulates a
hernia; and when it occurs in the middle line of the face, head, or
back, it may be mistaken for such other congenital conditions as
meningocele or spina bifida. When other means fail, the use of an
exploring needle clears up the diagnosis.

_Mixed Naevus._--As its name indicates, the mixed naevus partakes of the
characters of the other two varieties; that is, it is a subcutaneous
naevus with involvement of the skin.

It is frequently met with on the face and head, but may occur on any
part of the body. It also affects parts covered by mucous membrane, such
as the cheek, tongue, and soft palate. The swelling is rounded or
lobulated, and projects beyond the level of its surroundings. Sometimes
the skin is invaded by the naevoid tissue over the whole extent of the
tumour, sometimes only over a limited area. Frequently the margin only
is of a bright-red colour, while the skin in the centre resembles a
cicatrix. The swelling is reduced by steady pressure, and increases in
size and becomes tense when the child cries.

[Illustration: FIG. 68.--Mixed Naevus of Nose which was subsequently
cured by Electrolysis.]

_Prognosis._--The rate of growth of the subcutaneous and mixed forms of
naevi varies greatly. They sometimes increase rapidly, especially during
the first few months of life; after this they usually grow at the same
rate as the child, or more slowly. There is a decided tendency to
disappearance of these varieties, fully 50 per cent. undergoing natural
cure by a process of obliteration, similar to the obliteration of
vessels in cicatricial tissue. This usually begins about the period of
the first dentition, sometimes at the second dentition, and sometimes at
puberty. On the other hand, an increased activity of growth may be shown
at these periods. The onset of natural cure is recognised by the tumour
becoming firmer and less compressible, and, in the mixed variety, by the
colour becoming less bright. Injury, infection, or ulceration of the
overlying skin may initiate the curative process.

Towards adult life the spaces in a subcutaneous naevus may become greatly
enlarged, leading to the formation of a cavernous angioma.

_Treatment._--In view of the frequency with which subcutaneous and mixed
naevi disappear spontaneously, interference is only called for when the
growth of the tumour is out of proportion to that of the child, or when,
from its situation--for example in the vicinity of the eye--any marked
increase in its size would render it less amenable to treatment.

The methods of treatment most generally applicable are the use of radium
and carbon dioxide snow, igni-puncture, electrolysis, and excision.

For naevi situated on exposed parts, where it is desirable to avoid a
scar, the use of _radium_ is to be preferred. The tube of radium is
applied at intervals to different parts of the naevus, the duration and
frequency of the applications varying with the strength of the
emanations and the reaction produced. The object aimed at is to induce
obliteration of the naevoid tissue by cicatricial contraction without
destroying the overlying skin. _Carbon-dioxide snow_ may be employed in
the same manner, but the results are inferior to those obtained by
radium.

_Igni-puncture_ consists in making a number of punctures at different
parts of the naevus with a fine-pointed thermo-cautery, with the object
of starting at each point a process of cicatrisation which extends
throughout the naevoid tissue and so obliterates the vessels.

_Electrolysis_ acts by decomposing the blood and tissues into their
constituent elements--oxygen and acids appearing at the positive,
hydrogen and bases at the negative electrode. These substances and gases
being given off in a nascent condition, at once enter into new
combinations with anything in the vicinity with which they have a
chemical affinity. In the naevus the practical result of this reaction is
that at the positive pole nitric acid, and at the negative pole caustic
potash, both in a state of minute subdivision, make their appearance.
The effect on the tissues around the positive pole, therefore, is
equivalent to that of an acid cauterisation, and on those round the
negative pole, to an alkaline cauterisation.

As the process is painful, a general anaesthetic is necessary. The
current used should be from 20 to 80 milliamperes, gradually increasing
from zero, without shock; three to six large Bunsen cells give a
sufficient current, and no galvanometer is required. Steel needles,
insulated with vulcanite to within an eighth of an inch of their points,
are the best. Both poles are introduced into the naevus, the positive
being kept fixed at one spot, while the negative is moved about so as to
produce a number of different tracks of cauterisation. On no account
must either pole be allowed to come in contact with the skin, lest a
slough be formed. The duration of the sitting is determined by the
effect produced, as indicated by the hardening of the tumour, the
average duration being from fifteen to twenty minutes. If pallor of the
skin appears, it indicates that the needles are too near the surface, or
that the blood supply to the integument is being cut off, and is an
indication to stop. To cauterise the track and so prevent bleeding, the
needles should be slowly withdrawn while the current is flowing. When
the skin is reached the current is turned off. The punctures are covered
with collodion. Six or eight weeks should be allowed to elapse before
repeating the procedure. From two to eight or ten sittings may be
necessary, according to the size and character of the naevus.

_Excision_ is to be preferred for naevi of moderate size situated on
covered parts of the body, where a scar is of no importance. Its chief
advantages over electrolysis are that a single operation is sufficient,
and that the cure is speedy and certain. The operation is attended with
much less haemorrhage than might be expected.

#Cavernous Angioma.#--This form of angioma consists of a series of large
blood spaces which are usually derived from the dilatation of the
capillaries of a subcutaneous naevus. The spaces come to communicate
freely with one another by the disappearance of adjacent capillary
walls. While the most common situation is in the subcutaneous tissue, a
cavernous angioma is sometimes met with in internal organs. It may
appear at any age from early youth to middle life, and is of slow growth
and may become stationary. The swelling is rounded or oval, there is no
pulsation or bruit, and the tumour is but slightly compressible. The
treatment consists in dissecting it out.

#Aneurysm by Anastomosis# is the name applied to a vascular tumour in
which the arteries, veins, and capillaries are all involved. It is met
with chiefly on the upper part of the trunk, the neck, and the scalp. It
tends gradually to increase in size, and may, after many years, attain
an enormous size. The tumour is ill-defined, and varies in consistence.
It is pulsatile, and a systolic bruit or a "thrilling" murmur may be
heard over it. The chief risk is haemorrhage from injury or ulceration.

[Illustration: FIG. 69.--Cirsoid Aneurysm of Forehead in a boy aet. 10.

(Mr. J. W. Dowden's case.)]

The _treatment_ is conducted on the same lines as for naevus. When
electrolysis is employed, it should be directed towards the afferent
vessels; and if it fails to arrest the flow through these, it is useless
to persist with it. In some cases ligation of the afferent vessels has
been successful.

#Arterial Angioma# or #Cirsoid Aneurysm#.--This is composed of the
enlarged branches of an arterial trunk. It originates in the smaller
branches of an artery--usually the temporal--and may spread to the main
trunk, and may even involve branches of other trunks with which the
affected artery anastomoses.

The condition is probably congenital in origin, though its appearance is
frequently preceded by an injury. It almost invariably occurs in the
scalp, and is usually met with in adolescent young adults.

The affected vessels slowly increase in size, and become tortuous, with
narrowings and dilatations here and there. Grooves and gutters are
frequently found in the bone underlying the dilated vessels.

There is a constant loud bruit in the tumour, which greatly troubles the
patient and may interfere with sleep. There is no tendency either to
natural cure or to rupture, but severe and even fatal haemorrhage may
follow a wound of the dilated vessels.

[Illustration: FIG. 70.--Cirsoid Aneurysm of Orbit and Face, which
developed after a blow on the Orbit with a cricket ball.

(From a photograph lent by Sir Montagu Cotterill.)]

The condition may be treated by excision or by electrolysis. In excision
the haemorrhage is controlled by an elastic tourniquet applied
horizontally round the head, or by ligation of the feeding trunks. In
large tumours the bleeding is formidable. In many cases electrolysis is
to be preferred, and is performed in the same way as for naevus. The
positive pole is placed in the centre of the tumour, while the negative
is introduced into the main affluents one after another.


ANEURYSM

An aneurysm is a sac communicating with an artery, and containing fluid
or coagulated blood.

Two types are met with--the pathological and the traumatic. It is
convenient to describe in this section also certain conditions in which
there is an abnormal communication between an artery and a
vein--arterio-venous aneurysm.


PATHOLOGICAL ANEURYSM

In this class are included such dilatations as result from weakening of
the arterial coats, combined, in most cases, with a loss of elasticity
in the walls and increase in the arterial tension due to
arterio-sclerosis. In some cases the vessel wall is softened by
arteritis--especially the embolic form--so that it yields before the
pressure of the blood.

Repeated and sudden raising of the arterial tension, as a result, for
example, of violent muscular efforts or of excessive indulgence in
alcohol, plays an important part in the causation of aneurysm. These
factors probably explain the comparative frequency of aneurysm in those
who follow such arduous occupations as soldiers, sailors,
dock-labourers, and navvies. In these classes the condition usually
manifests itself between the ages of thirty and fifty--that is, when the
vessels are beginning to degenerate, although the heart is still
vigorous and the men are hard at work. The comparative immunity of women
may also be explained by the less severe muscular strain involved by
their occupations and recreations.

Syphilis plays an important part in the production of aneurysm, probably
by predisposing the patient to arterio-sclerosis and atheroma, and
inducing an increase in the vascular tension in the peripheral vessels,
from loss of elasticity of the vessel wall and narrowing of the lumen as
a result of syphilitic arteritis. It is a striking fact that aneurysm is
seldom met with in women who have not suffered from syphilis.

#Varieties--Fusiform Aneurysm.#--When the _whole circumference_ of an
artery has been weakened, the tension of the blood causes the walls to
dilate uniformly, so that a fusiform or tubular aneurysm results. All
the coats of the vessel are stretched and form the sac of the aneurysm,
and the affected portion is not only dilated but is also increased in
length. This form is chiefly met with in the arch of the aorta, but may
occur in any of the main arterial trunks. As the sac of the aneurysm
includes all three coats, and as the inner and outer coats are usually
thickened by the deposit in them of connective tissue, this variety
increases in size slowly and seldom gives rise to urgent symptoms.

As a rule a fusiform aneurysm contains fluid blood, but when the intima
is roughened by disease, especially in the form of calcareous plates,
shreds of clot may adhere to it.

It has little tendency to natural cure, although this is occasionally
effected by the emerging artery becoming occluded by a clot; it has also
little tendency to rupture.

#Sacculated Aneurysm.#--When a _limited area_ of the vessel wall is
weakened--for example by atheroma or by other form of arteritis--this
portion yields before the pressure of the blood, and a sacculated
aneurysm results. The internal and middle coats being already damaged,
or, it may be, destroyed, by the primary disease, the stress falls on
the external coat, which in the majority of cases constitutes the sac.
To withstand the pressure the external coat becomes thickened, and as
the aneurysm increases in size it forms adhesions to surrounding
tissues, so that fasciae, tendons, nerves, and other structures may be
found matted together in its wall. The wall is further strengthened by
the deposit on its inner aspect of blood-clot, which may eventually
become organised.

The contents of the sac consist of fluid blood and a varying amount of
clot which is deposited in concentric layers on the inner aspect of the
sac, where it forms a pale, striated, firm mass, which constitutes a
laminated clot. Near the blood-current the clot is soft, red, and
friable (Fig. 72). The laminated clot not only strengthens the sac,
enabling it to resist the blood-pressure and so prevent rupture, but, if
it increases sufficiently to fill the cavity, may bring about cure. The
principle upon which all methods of treatment are based is to imitate
nature in producing such a clot.

Sacculated aneurysm, as compared with the fusiform variety, tends to
rupture and also to cure by the formation of laminated clot; natural
cure is sometimes all but complete when extension and rupture occur and
cause death.

An aneurysm is said to be _diffused_ when the sac ruptures and the blood
escapes into the cellular tissue.

#Clinical Features of Aneurysm.#--Surgically, the sacculated is by far
the most important variety. The outstanding feature is the existence in
the line of an artery of a globular swelling, which pulsates. The
pulsation is of an expansile character, which is detected by observing
that when both hands are placed over the swelling they are separated
with each beat of the heart. If the main artery be compressed on the
cardiac side of the swelling, the pulsation is arrested and the tumour
becomes smaller and less tense, and it may be still further reduced in
size by gentle pressure being made over it so as to empty it of fluid
blood. On allowing the blood again to flow through the artery, the
pulsation returns at once, but several beats are required before the sac
regains its former size. In most cases a distinct thrill is felt on
placing the hand over the swelling, and a blowing, systolic murmur may
be heard with the stethoscope. It is to be borne in mind that
occasionally, when the interchange of blood between an aneurysm and the
artery from which it arises is small, pulsation and bruit may be slight
or even absent. This is also the case when the sac contains a
considerable quantity of clot. When it becomes filled with
clot--_consolidated aneurysm_--these signs disappear, and the clinical
features are those of a solid tumour lying in contact with an artery,
and transmitting its pulsation.

A comparison of the pulse in the artery beyond the seat of the aneurysm
with that in the corresponding artery on the healthy side, shows that on
the affected side the wave is smaller in volume, and delayed in time. A
pulse tracing shows that the normal impulse and dicrotic waves are lost,
and that the force and rapidity of the tidal wave are diminished.

[Illustration: FIG. 71.--Radiogram of Aneurysm of Aorta, showing
laminated clot and erosion of bodies of vertebrae. The intervertebral
discs are intact.]

An aneurysm exerts pressure on the surrounding structures, which are
usually thickened and adherent to it and to one another. Adjacent veins
may be so compressed that congestion and oedema of the parts beyond are
produced. Pain, disturbances of sensation, and muscular paralyses may
result from pressure on nerves. Such bones as the sternum and vertebrae
undergo erosion and are absorbed by the gradually increasing pressure of
the aneurysm. Cartilage, on the other hand, being elastic, yields before
the pressure, so that the intervertebral discs or the costal cartilages
may escape while the adjacent bones are destroyed (Fig. 71). The skin
over the tumour becomes thinned and stretched, until finally a slough
forms, and when it separates haemorrhage takes place.

[Illustration: FIG. 72.--Sacculated Aneurysm of Abdominal Aorta nearly
filled with laminated clot. Note greater density of clot towards
periphery.]

In the progress of an aneurysm towards rupture, timely clotting may
avert death for the moment, but while extension in one direction has
been arrested there is apt to be extension in another, with imminence of
rupture, or it may be again postponed.

#Differential Diagnosis.#--The diagnosis is to be made from other
pulsatile swellings. Pulsation is sometimes transmitted from a large
artery to a tumour, a mass of enlarged lymph glands, or an inflammatory
swelling which lies in its vicinity, but the pulsation is not
expansile--a most important point in differential diagnosis. Such
swellings may, by appropriate manipulation, be moved from the artery and
the pulsation ceases, and compression of the artery on the cardiac side
of the swelling, although it arrests the pulsation, does not produce any
diminution in the size or tension of the swelling, and when the pressure
is removed the pulsation is restored immediately.

Fluid swellings overlying an artery, such as cysts, abscesses, or
enlarged bursae, may closely simulate aneurysm. An apparent expansion may
accompany the pulsation, but careful examination usually enables this to
be distinguished from the true expansion of an aneurysm. Compression of
the artery makes no difference in the size or tension of the swelling.

Vascular tumours, such as sarcoma and goitre, may yield an expansile
pulsation and a soft, whifling bruit, but they differ from an aneurysm
in that they are not diminished in size by compression of the main
artery, nor can they be emptied by pressure.

The exaggerated pulsation sometimes observed in the abdominal aorta, the
"pulsating aorta" seen in women, should not be mistaken for aneurysm.

#Prognosis.#--When _natural cure_ occurs it is usually brought about by
the formation of laminated clot, which gradually increases in amount
till it fills the sac. Sometimes a portion of the clot in the sac is
separated and becomes impacted as an embolus in the artery beyond,
leading to thrombosis which first occludes the artery and then extends
into the sac.

The progress of natural cure is indicated by the aneurysm becoming
smaller, firmer, less expansile, and less compressible; the murmur and
thrill diminish and the pressure effects become less marked. When the
cure is complete the expansile pulsation is lost, and there remains a
firm swelling attached to the vessel (_consolidated aneurysm_). While
these changes are taking place the collateral arteries become enlarged,
and an anastomotic circulation is established.

An aneurysm may prove _fatal_ by exerting pressure on important
structures, by causing syncope, by rupture, or from the occurrence of
suppuration. _Pressure_ symptoms are usually most serious from aneurysms
situated in the neck, thorax, or skull. Sudden fatal _syncope_ is not
infrequent in cases of aneurysm of the thoracic aorta.

_Rupture_ may take place through the skin, on a mucous or serous
surface, or into the cellular tissue. The first haemorrhage is often
slight and stops naturally, but it soon recurs, and is so profuse,
especially when the blood escapes externally, that it rapidly proves
fatal. When the bleeding takes place into the cellular tissue, the
aneurysm is said to become _diffused_, and the extravasated blood
spreads widely through the tissues, exerting great pressure on the
surrounding structures.

The _clinical features_ associated with rupture are sudden and severe
pain in the part, and the patient becomes pale, cold, and faint. If a
comparatively small escape of blood takes place into the tissues, the
sudden alteration in the size, shape, and tension of the aneurysm,
together with loss of pulsation, may be the only local signs. When the
bleeding is profuse, however, the parts beyond the aneurysm become
greatly swollen, livid, and cold, and the pulse beyond is completely
lost. The arrest of the blood supply may result in gangrene. Sometimes
the pressure of the extravasated blood causes the skin to slough and,
later, give way, and fatal haemorrhage results.

The _treatment_ is carried out on the same lines as for a ruptured
artery (p. 261), it being remembered, however, that the artery is
diseased and does not lend itself to reconstructive procedures.

_Suppuration_ may occur in the vicinity of an aneurysm, and the aneurysm
may burst into the abscess which forms, so that when the latter points
the pus is mixed with broken-down blood-clot, and finally free
haemorrhage takes place. It has more than once happened that a surgeon
has incised such an abscess without having recognised its association
with aneurysm, with tragic results.

#Treatment.#--In treating an aneurysm, the indications are to imitate
Nature's method of cure by means of laminated clot.

_Constitutional treatment_ consists in taking measures to reduce the
arterial tension and to diminish the force of the heart's action. The
patient must be kept in bed. A dry and non-stimulating diet is
indicated, the quantity being gradually reduced till it is just
sufficient to maintain nutrition. Saline purges are employed to reduce
the vascular tension. The benefit derived from potassium iodide
administered in full doses, as first recommended by George W. Balfour,
probably depends on its depressing action on the heart and its
therapeutic benefit in syphilis. Pain or restlessness may call for the
use of opiates, of which heroin is the most efficient.

_Local Treatment._--When constitutional treatment fails, local measures
must be adopted, and many methods are available.

#Endo-aneurysmorrhaphy.#--The operation devised by Rudolf Matas in 1888
aims at closing the opening between the sac and its feeding artery, and
in addition, folding the wall of the sac in such a way as to leave no
vacant space. If there is marked disease of the vessel, Matas' operation
is not possible and recourse is then had to ligation of the artery just
above the sac.

_Extirpation of the Sac--The Old Operation._--The procedure which goes
by this name consists in exposing the aneurysm, incising the sac,
clearing out the clots, and ligating the artery above and below the sac.
This method is suitable to sacculated aneurysm of the limbs, so long as
they are circumscribed and free from complications. It has been
successfully practised also in aneurysm of the subclavian, carotid, and
external iliac arteries. It is not applicable to cases in which there is
such a degree of atheroma as would interfere with the successful
ligation of the artery. The continuity of the artery may be restored by
grafting into the gap left after excision of the sac a segment of the
great saphena vein.

_Ligation of the Artery._--The object of tying the artery is to diminish
or to arrest the flow of blood through the aneurysm so that the blood
coagulates both in the sac and in the feeding artery. The ligature may
be applied on the cardiac side of the aneurysm--proximal ligation, or to
the artery beyond--distal ligation.

_Proximal Ligation._--The ligature may be applied immediately above the
sac (Anel, 1710) or at a distance above (John Hunter, 1785). The
_Hunterian operation_ ensures that the ligature is applied to a part of
the artery that is presumably healthy and where relations are
undisturbed by the proximity of the sac; the best example is the
ligation of the superficial femoral artery in Scarpa's triangle or in
Hunter's canal for popliteal aneurysm; it is on record that Syme
performed this operation with cure of the aneurysm on thirty-nine
occasions.

It is to be noted that the Hunterian ligature does not aim at
_arresting_ the flow of blood through the sac, but is designed so to
diminish its volume and force as to favour the deposition within the sac
of laminated clot. The development of the collateral circulation which
follows upon ligation of the artery at a distance above the sac may be
attended with just that amount of return stream which favours the
deposit of laminated clot, and consequently the cure of the aneurysm;
the return stream may, however, be so forcible as to prevent coagulation
of the blood in the sac, or only to allow of the formation of a red
thrombus which may in its turn be dispersed so that pulsation in the sac
recurs. This does not necessarily imply failure to cure, as the
recurrent pulsation may only be temporary; the formation of laminated
clot may ultimately take place and lead to consolidation of the
aneurysm.

The least desirable result of the Hunterian ligature is met with in
cases where, owing to widespread arterial disease, the collateral
circulation does not develop and gangrene of the limb supervenes.

_Anel's ligature_ is only practised as part of the operation which deals
with the sac directly.

_Distal Ligation._--The tying of the artery beyond the sac, or of its
two branches where it bifurcates (Brasdor, 1760, and Wardrop, 1825), may
arrest or only diminish the flow of blood through the sac. It is less
successful than the proximal ligature, and is therefore restricted to
aneurysms so situated as not to be amenable to other methods; for
example, in aneurysm of the common carotid near its origin, the artery
may be ligated near its bifurcation, or in aneurysm of the innominate
artery, the carotid and subclavian arteries are tied at the seat of
election.

_Compression._--Digital compression of the feeding artery has been given
up except as a preparation for operations on the sac with a view to
favouring the development of a collateral circulation.

_Macewen's acupuncture or "needling"_ consists in passing one or more
fine, highly tempered steel needles through the tissues overlying the
aneurysm, and through its outer wall. The needles are made to touch the
opposite wall of the sac, and the pulsation of the aneurysm imparts a
movement to them which causes them to scarify the inner surface of the
sac. White thrombus forms on the rough surface produced, and leads to
further coagulation. The needles may be left in position for some hours,
being shifted from time to time, the projecting ends being surrounded
with sterile gauze.

The _Moore-Corradi method_ consists in introducing through the wall of
the aneurysm a hollow insulated needle, through the lumen of which from
10 to 20 feet of highly drawn silver or other wire is passed into the
sac, where it coils up into an open meshwork (Fig. 73). The positive
pole of a galvanic battery is attached to the wire, and the negative
pole placed over the patient's back. A current, varying in strength from
20 to 70 milliamperes, is allowed to flow for about an hour. The hollow
needle is then withdrawn, but the wire is left _in situ_. The results
are somewhat similar to those obtained by needling, but the clot formed
on the large coil of wire is more extensive.

[Illustration: FIG. 73.--Radiogram of Innominate Aneurysm after
treatment by the Moore-Corradi method. Two feet of finely drawn silver
wire were introduced. The patient, a woman, aet. 47, lived for ten months
after operation, free from pain (cf. Fig. 75).]

Colt's method of wiring has been mainly used in the treatment of
abdominal aneurysm; gilt wire in the form of a wisp is introduced
through the cannula and expands into an umbrella shape.

_Subcutaneous Injections of Gelatin._--Three or four ounces of a 2 per
cent. solution of white gelatin in sterilised water, at a temperature of
about 100 o F., are injected into the subcutaneous tissue of the abdomen
every two, three, or four days. In the course of a fortnight or three
weeks improvement may begin. The clot which forms is liable to soften
and be absorbed, but a repetition of the injection has in several cases
established a permanent cure.

_Amputation of the limb_ is indicated in cases complicated by
suppuration, by secondary haemorrhage after excision or ligation, or by
gangrene. Amputation at the shoulder was performed by Fergusson in a
case of subclavian aneurysm, as a means of arresting the blood-flow
through the sac.


TRAUMATIC ANEURYSM

The essential feature of a traumatic aneurysm is that it is produced by
some form of injury which divides all the coats of the artery. The walls
of the injured vessel are presumably healthy, but they form no part of
the sac of the aneurysm. The sac consists of the condensed and thickened
tissues around the artery.

The injury to the artery may be a subcutaneous one such as a tear by a
fragment of bone: much more commonly it is a punctured wound from a stab
or from a bullet.

The aneurysm usually forms soon after the injury is inflicted; the blood
slowly escapes into the surrounding tissues, gradually displacing and
condensing them, until they form a sac enclosing the effused blood.

Less frequently a traumatic aneurysm forms some considerable time after
the injury, from gradual stretching of the fibrous cicatrix by which the
wound in the wall of the artery has been closed. The gradual stretching
of this cicatrix results in condensation of the surrounding structures
which form the sac, on the inner aspect of which laminated clot is
deposited.

A traumatic aneurysm is almost always sacculated, and, so long as it
remains circumscribed, has the same characters as a pathological
sacculated aneurysm, with the addition that there is a scar in the
overlying skin. A traumatic aneurysm is liable to become diffuse--a
change which, although attended with considerable risk of gangrene, has
sometimes been the means of bringing about a cure.

The treatment is governed by the same principles as apply to the
pathological varieties, but as the walls of the artery are not diseased,
operative measures dealing with the sac and the adjacent segment of the
affected artery are to be preferred.


ARTERIO-VENOUS ANEURYSM

An abnormal communication between an artery and a vein constitutes an
arterio-venous aneurysm. Two varieties are recognised--one in which the
communication is direct--_aneurysmal varix_; the other in which the
vein communicates with the artery through the medium of a sac--_varicose
aneurysm_.

Either variety may result from pathological causes, but in the majority
of cases they are traumatic in origin, being due to such injuries as
stabs, punctured wounds, and gun-shot injuries which involve both artery
and vein. In former times the most common situation was at the bend of
the elbow, the brachial artery being accidentally punctured in
blood-letting from the median basilic vein. Arterio-venous aneurysm is a
frequent result of injuries by modern high-velocity bullets--for
example, in the neck or groin.

In _aneurysmal varix_ the higher blood pressure in the artery forces
arterial blood into the vein, which near the point of communication with
the artery tends to become dilated, and to form a thick-walled sac,
beyond which the vessel and its tributaries are distended and tortuous.
The clinical features resemble those associated with varicose veins, but
the entrance of arterial blood into the dilated veins causes them to
pulsate, and produces in them a vibratory thrill and a loud murmur. In
those at the groin, the distension of the veins may be so great that
they look like sinuses running through the muscles, a feature that must
be taken into account in any operation.

As the condition tends to remain stationary, the support of an elastic
bandage is all that is required; but when the condition progresses and
causes serious inconvenience, it may be necessary to cut down and expose
the communication between the artery and vein, and, after separating the
vessels, to close the opening in each by suture; this may be difficult
or impossible if the parts are matted from former suppuration. If it is
impossible thus to obliterate the communication, the artery should be
ligated above and below the point of communication; although the risk of
gangrene is considerable unless means are taken to develop the
collateral circulation beforehand (Makins).

_Varicose aneurysm_ usually develops in relation to a traumatic
aneurysm, the sac becoming adherent to an adjacent vein, and ultimately
opening into it. In this way a communication between the artery and the
vein is established, and the clinical features are those of a
combination of aneurysm and aneurysmal varix.

As there is little tendency to spontaneous cure, and as the aneurysm is
liable to increase in size and finally to rupture, operative treatment
is usually called for. This is carried out on the same lines as for
aneurysmal varix, and at the same time incising the sac, turning out the
clots, and ligating any branches which open into the sac. If it can be
avoided, the vein should not be ligated.


ANEURYSMS OF INDIVIDUAL ARTERIES

#Thoracic Aneurysm.#--All varieties of aneurysm occur in the aorta, the
fusiform being the most common, although a sacculated aneurysm
frequently springs from a fusiform dilatation.

The _clinical features_ depend chiefly on the direction in which the
aneurysm enlarges, and are not always well marked even when the sac is
of considerable size. They consist in a pulsatile swelling--sometimes in
the supra-sternal notch, but usually towards the right side of the
sternum--with an increased area of dulness on percussion. With the
X-rays a dark shadow is seen corresponding to the sac. Pain is usually a
prominent symptom, and is largely referable to the pressure of the
aneurysm on the vertebrae or the sternum, causing erosion of these bones.
Pressure on the thoracic veins and on the air-passage causes cyanosis
and dyspnoea. When the oesophagus is pressed upon, the patient may have
difficulty in swallowing. The left recurrent nerve may be stretched or
pressed upon as it hooks round the arch of the aorta, and hoarseness of
the voice and a characteristic "brassy" cough may result from paralysis
of the muscles of the larynx which it supplies. The vagus, the phrenic,
and the spinal nerves may also be pressed upon. When the aneurysm is on
the transverse part of the arch, the trachea is pulled down with each
beat of the heart--a clinical phenomena known as the "tracheal tug."
Aneurysm of the descending aorta may, after eroding the bodies of the
vertebrae (Fig. 71) and posterior portions of the ribs, form a swelling
in the back to the left of the spine.

Inasmuch as obliteration of the sac and the feeding artery is out of the
question, surgical treatment is confined to causing coagulation of the
blood in an extension or pouching of the sac, which, making its way
through the parietes of the chest, threatens to rupture externally. This
may be achieved by Macewen's needles or by the introduction of wire into
the sac. We have had cases under observation in which the treatment
referred to has been followed by such an amount of improvement that the
patient has been able to resume a laborious occupation for one or more
years. Christopher Heath found that improvement followed ligation of the
left common carotid in aneurysm of the transverse part of the aortic
arch.

[Illustration: FIG. 74.--Thoracic Aneurysm, threatening to rupture
externally, but prevented from doing so by Macewen's needling. The
needles were left in for forty-eight hours.]

#Abdominal Aneurysm.#--Aneurysm is much less frequent in the abdominal
than in the thoracic aorta. While any of the large branches in the
abdomen may be affected, the most common seats are in the aorta itself,
just above the origin of the coeliac artery and at the bifurcation.

The _clinical features_ vary with the site of the aneurysm and with its
rapidity and direction of growth. A smooth, rounded swelling, which
exhibits expansile pulsation, forms, usually towards the left of the
middle line. It may extend upwards under cover of the ribs, downwards
towards the pelvis, or backward towards the loin. On palpation a
systolic thrill may be detected, but the presence of a murmur is neither
constant nor characteristic. Pain is usually present; it may be
neuralgic in character, or may simulate renal colic. When the aneurysm
presses on the vertebrae and erodes them, the symptoms simulate those of
spinal caries, particularly if, as sometimes happens, symptoms of
compression paraplegia ensue. In its growth the swelling may press upon
and displace the adjacent viscera, and so interfere with their
functions.

The _diagnosis_ has to be made from solid or cystic tumours overlying
the artery; from a "pulsating aorta"; and from spinal caries; much help
is obtained by the use of the X-rays.

The condition usually proves fatal, either by the aneurysm bursting into
the peritoneal cavity, or by slow leakage into the retro-peritoneal
tissue.

The Moore-Corradi method has been successfully employed, access to the
sac having been obtained by opening the abdomen. Ligation of the aorta
has so far been unsuccessful, but in one case operated upon by Keen the
patient survived forty-eight days.

#Innominate aneurysm# may be of the fusiform or of the sacculated
variety, and is frequently associated with pouching of the aorta. It
usually grows upwards and laterally, projecting above the sternum and
right clavicle, which may be eroded or displaced (Fig. 75). Symptoms of
pressure on the structures in the neck, similar to those produced by
aortic aneurysm, occur. The pulses in the right upper extremity and in
the right carotid and its branches are diminished and delayed. Pressure
on the right brachial plexus causes shooting pain down the arm and
muscular paresis on that side. Vaso-motor disturbances and contraction
of the pupil on the right side may result from pressure on the
sympathetic. Death may take place from rupture, or from pressure on the
air-passage.

[Illustration: FIG. 75.--Innominate Aneurysm in a woman, aet. 47, eight
months after treatment by Moore-Corradi method (cf. Fig. 73).]

The available methods of treatment are ligation of the right common
carotid and third part of the right subclavian (Wardrop's operation), of
which a number of successful cases have been recorded. Those most
suitable for ligation are cases in which the aneurysm is circumscribed
and globular (Sheen). If ligation is found to be impracticable, the
Moore-Corradi method or Macewen's needling may be tried.

#Carotid Aneurysms.#--Aneurysm of the _common carotid_ is more frequent
on the right than on the left side, and is usually situated either at
the root of the neck or near the bifurcation. It is the aneurysm most
frequently met with in women. From its position the swelling is liable
to press on the vagus, recurrent and sympathetic nerves, on the
air-passage, and on the oesophagus, giving rise to symptoms referable to
such pressure. There may be cerebral symptoms from interference with the
blood supply of the brain.

Aneurysm near the origin has to be diagnosed from subclavian,
innominate, and aortic aneurysm, and from other swellings--solid or
fluid--met with in the neck. It is often difficult to determine with
precision the trunk from which an aneurysm at the root of the neck
originates, and not infrequently more than one vessel shares in the
dilatation. A careful consideration of the position in which the
swelling first appeared, of the direction in which it has progressed, of
its pressure effects, and of the condition of the pulses beyond, may
help in distinguishing between aortic, innominate, carotid, and
subclavian aneurysms. Skiagraphy is also of assistance in recognising
the vessel involved.

Tumours of the thyreoid, enlarged lymph glands, and fatty and
sarcomatous tumours can usually be distinguished from aneurysm by the
history of the swelling and by physical examination. Cystic tumours and
abscesses in the neck are sometimes more difficult to differentiate on
account of the apparently expansile character of the pulsation
transmitted to them. The fact that compression of the vessel does not
affect the size and tension of these fluid swellings is useful in
distinguishing them from aneurysm.

_Treatment._--Digital compression of the vessel against the transverse
process of the sixth cervical vertebra--the "carotid tubercle"--has been
successfully employed in the treatment of aneurysm near the bifurcation.
Proximal ligation in the case of high aneurysms, or distal ligation in
those situated at the root of the neck, is more certain. Extirpation of
the sac is probably the best method of treatment, especially in those of
traumatic origin. These operations are attended with considerable risk
of hemiplegia from interference with the blood supply of the brain.

The _external carotid_ and the cervical portion of the _internal
carotid_ are seldom the primary seat of aneurysm, although they are
liable to be implicated by the upward spread of an aneurysm at the
bifurcation of the common trunk. In addition to the ordinary signs of
aneurysm, the clinical manifestations are chiefly referable to pressure
on the pharynx and larynx, and on the hypoglossal nerve. Aneurysm of the
internal carotid is of special importance on account of the way in which
it bulges into the pharynx in the region of the tonsil, in some cases
closely simulating a tonsillar abscess. Cases are on record in which
such an aneurysm has been mistaken for an abscess and incised, with
disastrous results.

_Aneurysmal varix_ may occur in the neck as a result of stabs or bullet
wounds. The communication is usually between the common carotid artery
and the internal jugular vein. The resulting interference with the
cerebral circulation causes headache, giddiness, and other brain
symptoms, and a persistent loud murmur is usually a source of annoyance
to the patient and may be sufficient indication for operative treatment.

#Intracranial aneurysm# involves the internal carotid and its branches,
or the basilar artery, and appears to be more frequently associated with
syphilis and with valvular disease of the heart than are external
aneurysms. It gives rise to symptoms similar to those of other
intracranial tumours, and there is sometimes a loud murmur. It usually
proves fatal by rupture, and intracranial haemorrhage. The treatment is
to ligate the common carotid or the vertebral artery in the neck,
according to the seat of the aneurysm.

#Orbital Aneurysm.#--The term pulsating exophthalmos is employed to
embrace a number of pathological conditions, including aneurysm, in
which the chief symptoms are pulsation in the orbit and protrusion of
the eyeball. There may be, in addition, congestion and oedema of the
eyelids, and a distinct thrill and murmur, which can be controlled by
compression of the common carotid in the neck. Varying degrees of ocular
paralysis and of interference with vision may also be present.

These symptoms are due, in the majority of cases, to an aneurysmal varix
of the internal carotid artery and cavernous sinus, which is often
traumatic in origin, being produced either by fracture of the base of
the skull or by a punctured wound of the orbit. In other cases they are
due to aneurysm of the ophthalmic artery, to thrombosis of the cavernous
sinus, and, in rare instances, to cirsoid aneurysm.

If compression of the common carotid is found to arrest the pulsation,
ligation of this vessel is indicated.

#Subclavian Aneurysm.#--Subclavian aneurysm is usually met with in men
who follow occupations involving constant use of the shoulder--for
example, dock-porters and coal-heavers. It is more common on the right
side.

The aneurysm usually springs from the third part of the artery, and
appears as a tense, rounded, pulsatile swelling just above the clavicle
and to the outer side of the sterno-mastoid muscle. It occasionally
extends towards the thorax, where it may become adherent to the pleura.
The radial pulse on the same side is small and delayed. Congestion and
oedema of the arm, with pain, numbness, and muscular weakness, may result
from pressure on the veins and nerves as they pass under the clavicle;
and pressure on the phrenic nerve may induce hiccough. The aneurysm is
of slow growth, and occasionally undergoes spontaneous cure.

The conditions most likely to be mistaken for it are a soft, rapidly
growing sarcoma, and a normal artery raised on a cervical rib.

On account of the relations of the artery and of its branches, treatment
is attended with greater difficulty and danger in subclavian than in
almost any other form of external aneurysm. The available operative
measures are proximal ligation of the innominate, and distal ligation.
In some cases it has been found necessary to combine distal ligation
with amputation at the shoulder-joint, to prevent the collateral
circulation maintaining the flow through the aneurysm. Matas' operation
has been successfully performed by Hogarth Pringle.

#Axillary Aneurysm.#--This is usually met with in the right arm of
labouring men and sailors, and not infrequently follows an injury in the
region of the shoulder. The vessel may be damaged by the head of a
dislocated humerus or in attempts to reduce the dislocation, by the
fragments of a fractured bone, or by a stab or cut. Sometimes the vein
also is injured and an arterio-venous aneurysm established.

Owing to the laxity of the tissues, it increases rapidly, and it may
soon attain a large size, filling up the axilla, and displacing the
clavicle upwards. This renders compression of the third part of the
subclavian difficult or impossible. It may extend beneath the clavicle
into the neck, or, extending inwards may form adhesions to the chest
wall, and, after eroding the ribs, to the pleura.

The usual symptoms of aneurysm are present, and the pressure effects on
the veins and nerves are similar to those produced by an aneurysm of the
subclavian. Intra-thoracic complications, such as pleurisy or pneumonia,
are not infrequent when there are adhesions to the chest wall and
pleura. Rupture may take place externally, into the shoulder-joint, or
into the pleura.

Extirpation of the sac is the operation of choice, but, if this is
impracticable, ligation of the third part of the subclavian may be had
recourse to.

#Brachial aneurysm# usually occurs at the bend of the elbow, is of
traumatic origin, and is best treated by excision of the sac.

_Aneurysmal varix_, which was frequently met with in this situation in
the days of the barber-surgeons,--usually as a result of the artery
having been accidentally wounded while performing venesection of the
median basilic vein,--may be treated, according to the amount of
discomfort it causes, by a supporting bandage, or by ligation of the
artery above and below the point of communication.

Aneurysms of the vessels of the #forearm and hand# call for no special
mention; they are almost invariably traumatic, and are treated by
excision of the sac.

#Inguinal Aneurysm# (_Aneurysm of the Iliac and Femoral
Arteries_).--Aneurysms appearing in the region of Poupart's ligament may
have their origin in the external or common iliac arteries or in the
upper part of the femoral. On account of the tension of the fascia lata,
they tend to spread upwards towards the abdomen, and, to a less extent,
downwards into the thigh. Sometimes a constriction occurs across the
sac at the level of Poupart's ligament.

The pressure exerted on the nerves and veins of the lower extremity
causes pain, congestion, and oedema of the limb. Rupture may take place
externally, or into the cellular tissue of the iliac fossa.

These aneurysms have to be diagnosed from pulsating sarcoma growing from
the pelvic bones, and from an abscess or a mass of enlarged lymph glands
overlying the artery and transmitting its pulsation.

The method of treatment that has met with most success is ligation of
the common or external iliac, reached either by reflecting the
peritoneum from off the iliac fossa (extra-peritoneal operation), or by
going through the peritoneal cavity (trans-peritoneal operation).

#Gluteal Aneurysm.#--An aneurysm in the buttock may arise from the
superior or from the inferior gluteal artery, but by the time it forms a
salient swelling it is seldom possible to recognise by external
examination in which vessel it takes origin. The special symptoms to
which it gives rise are pain down the limb from pressure on the sciatic
nerve, and interference with the movements at the hip.

Ligation of the hypogastric (internal iliac) by the trans-peritoneal
route is the most satisfactory method of treatment. Extirpation of the
sac is difficult and dangerous, especially when the aneurysm has spread
into the pelvis.

#Femoral Aneurysm.#--Aneurysm of the femoral artery beyond the origin of
the profunda branch is usually traumatic in origin, and is more common
in Scarpa's triangle than in Hunter's canal. Any of the methods already
described is available for their treatment--the choice lying between
Matas' operation and ligation of the external iliac.

Aneurysm of the _profunda femoris_ is distinguished from that of the
main trunk by the fact that the pulses beyond are, in the former,
unaffected, and by the normal artery being felt pulsating over or
alongside the sac.

In _aneurysmal varix_, a not infrequent result of a bullet wound or a
stab, the communication with the vein may involve the main trunk of the
femoral artery. Should operative interference become necessary as a
result of progressive increase in size of the tumour, or progressive
distension of the veins of the limb, an attempt should be made to
separate the vessels concerned and to close the opening in each by
suture. If this is impracticable, the artery is tied above and below the
communication; gangrene of the limb may supervene, and we have observed
a case in which the gangrene extended up to the junction of the middle
and lower thirds of the thigh, and in which recovery followed upon
amputation of the thigh.

#Popliteal Aneurysm.#--This is the most common surgical aneurysm, and is
not infrequently met with in both limbs. It is generally due to disease
of the artery, and repeated slight strains, which are so liable to occur
at the knee, play an important part in its formation. In former times it
was common in post-boys, from the repeated flexion and extension of the
knee in riding.

The aneurysm is usually of the sacculated variety, and may spring from
the front or from the back of the vessel. It may exert pressure on the
bones and ligaments of the joint, and it has been known to rupture into
the articulation. The pain, stiffness, and effusion into the joint which
accompany these changes often lead to an erroneous diagnosis of joint
disease. The sac may press upon the popliteal artery or vein and their
branches, causing congestion and oedema of the leg, and lead to gangrene.
Pressure on the tibial and common peroneal nerves gives rise to severe
pain, muscular cramp, and weakness of the leg.

The differential diagnosis is to be made from abscess, bursal cyst,
enlarged glands, and sarcoma, especially pulsating sarcoma of one of the
bones entering into the knee joint.

The choice of operation lies between ligation of the femoral artery in
Hunter's canal, and Matas' operation of aneurysmo-arteriorrhaphy. The
success which attends the Hunterian operation is evidenced by the fact
that Syme performed it thirty-seven times without a single failure. If
it fails, the old operation should be considered, but it is a more
serious operation, and one which is more liable to be followed by
gangrene of the limb. Experience shows that ligation of the vein, or
even the removal of a portion of it, is not necessarily followed by
gangrene. The risk of gangrene is diminished by a course of digital
compression of the femoral artery, before operating on the aneurysm.

_Aneurysmal varix_ is sometimes met with in the region of the popliteal
space. It is characterised by the usual symptoms, and is treated by
palliative measures, or by ligation of the artery above and below the
point of communication.

_Aneurysm_ in the #leg and foot# is rare. It is almost always traumatic,
and is treated by excision of the sac.




CHAPTER XV

THE LYMPH VESSELS AND GLANDS


Anatomy and Physiology--INJURIES OF LYMPH VESSELS--_Wounds of
    thoracic duct_--DISEASES OF LYMPH VESSELS--Lymphangitis:
    _Varieties_--Lymphangiectasis--Filarial
    disease--Lymphangioma--DISEASES OF LYMPH
    GLANDS--Lymphadenitis: _Septic_; _Tuberculous_;
    _Syphilitic_--Lymphadenoma--Leucocythaemia--TUMOURS.

#Surgical Anatomy and Physiology.#--Lymph is essentially blood plasma,
which has passed through the walls of capillaries. After bathing
and nourishing the tissues, it is collected by lymph vessels, which
return it to the blood stream by way of the thoracic duct. These lymph
vessels take origin in the lymph spaces of the tissues and in the
walls of serous cavities, and they usually run alongside blood
vessels--_perivascular lymph vessels_. They have a structure similar to
that of veins, but are more abundantly provided with valves. Along the
course of the lymph trunks are the _lymph glands_, which possess a
definite capsule and are composed of a reticulated connective tissue,
the spaces of which are packed with leucocytes. The glands act as
filters, arresting not only inert substances, such as blood pigment
circulating in the lymph, but also living elements, such as cancer cells
or bacteria. As it passes through a gland the lymph is brought into
intimate contact with the leucocytes, and in bacterial infections there
is always a struggle between the organisms and the leucocytes, so that
the glands may be looked upon as an important line of defence, retarding
or preventing the passage of bacteria and their products into the
general circulation. The infective agent, moreover, in order to reach
the blood stream, must usually overcome the resistance of several
glands.

Lymph glands are, for the most part, arranged in groups or chains, such
as those in the axilla, neck, and groin. In any given situation they
vary in number and size in different individuals, and fresh glands may
be formed on comparatively slight stimulus, and disappear when the
stimulus is withdrawn. The best-known example of this is the increase in
the number of glands in the axilla which takes place during lactation;
when this function ceases, many of the glands become involuted and are
transformed into fat, and in the event of a subsequent lactation they
are again developed. After glands have been removed by operation, new
ones may be formed.

The following are the more important groups of glands, and the areas
drained by them in the head and neck and in the extremities.

#Head and Neck.#--_The anterior auricular (parotid and pre-auricular)
glands_ lie beneath the parotid fascia in front of the ear, and some
are partly embedded in the substance of the parotid gland; they drain
the parts about the temple, cheek, eyelids, and auricle, and are
frequently the seat of tuberculous disease. _The occipital gland_,
situated over the origin of the trapezius from the superior curved line,
drains the top and back of the head; it is rarely infected. _The
posterior auricular (mastoid) glands_ lie over the mastoid process, and
drain the side of the head and auricle. These three groups pour their
lymph into the superficial cervical glands. _The submaxillary_--two to
six in number--lie along the lower order of the mandible from the
symphysis to the angle, the posterior ones (paramandibular) being
closely connected with the submaxillary salivary gland. They receive
lymph from the face, lips, floor of the mouth, gums, teeth, anterior
part of tongue, and the alae nasi, and from the pre-auricular glands. The
lymph passes from them into the deeper cervical glands. They are
frequently infected with tubercle, with epithelioma which has spread to
them from the mouth, and also with pyogenic organisms. _The submental
glands_ lie in or close to the median line between the anterior bellies
of the digastric muscles, and receive lymph from the lips. It is rare
for them to be the seat of tubercle, but in epithelioma of the lower lip
and floor of the mouth they are infected at an early stage of the
disease. _The supra-hyoid gland_ lies a little farther back, immediately
above the hyoid bone, and receives lymph from the tongue. _The
superficial cervical (external jugular) glands_, when present, lie along
the external jugular vein, and receives lymph from the occipital and
auricular glands and from the auricle. _The sterno-mastoid
glands_--glandulae concatinatae--form a chain along the posterior edge of
the sterno-mastoid muscle, some of them lying beneath the muscle. They
are commonly enlarged in secondary syphilis. _The superior deep cervical
(internal jugular) glands_--from six to twenty in number--form a
continuous chain along the internal jugular vein, beneath the
sterno-mastoid muscle. They drain the various groups of glands which lie
nearer the surface, also the interior of the skull, the larynx, trachea,
thyreoid, and lower part of the pharynx, and pour their lymph into the
main trunks at the root of the neck. Belonging to this group is one
large gland (the tonsillar gland) which lies behind the posterior belly
of the digastric, and rests in the angle between the internal jugular
and common facial veins. It is commonly enlarged in affections of the
tonsil and posterior part of the tongue. In the same group are three or
four glands which lie entirely under cover of the upper end of the
sterno-mastoid muscle, and surround the accessory nerve before it
perforates the muscle. The deep cervical glands are commonly infected by
tubercle and also by epithelioma secondary to disease in the tongue or
throat. _The inferior deep cervical (supra-clavicular) glands_ lie in
the posterior triangle, above the clavicle. They receive lymph from the
lowest cervical glands, from the upper part of the chest wall, and from
the highest axillary glands. They are frequently infected in cancer of
the breast; those on the left side also in cancer of the stomach. The
removal of diseased supra-clavicular glands is not to be lightly
undertaken, as difficulties are liable to ensue in connection with the
thoracic duct, the pleura, or the junction of the subclavian and
internal jugular veins. _The retro-pharyngeal glands_ lie on each side
of the median line upon the rectus capitis anticus major muscle and in
front of the pre-vertebral layer of the cervical fascia. They receive
part of the lymph from the posterior wall of the pharynx, the interior
of the nose and its accessory cavities, the auditory (Eustachian) tube,
and the tympanum. When they are infected with pyogenic organisms or
with tubercle bacilli, they may lead to the formation of one form of
retro-pharyngeal abscess.

#Upper Extremity.#--_The epi-trochlear and cubital glands_ vary in
number, that most commonly present lying about an inch and a half above
the medial epi-condyle, and other and smaller glands may lie along the
medial (internal) bicipital groove or at the bend of the elbow. They
drain the ulnar side of the hand and forearm, and pour their lymph into
the axillary group. The epi-trochlear gland is sometimes enlarged in
syphilis. _The axillary glands_ are arranged in groups: a central group
lies embedded in the axillary fascia and fat, and is often related to an
opening in it; a posterior or subscapular group lies along the line of
the subscapular vessels; anterior or pectoral groups lie behind the
pectoralis minor, along the medial side of the axillary vein, and an
inter-pectoral group, between the two pectoral muscles. The axillary
glands receive lymph from the arm, mamma, and side of the chest, and
pass it on into the lowest cervical glands and the main lymph trunk.
They are frequently the seat of pyogenic, tuberculous, and cancerous
infection, and their complete removal is an essential part of the
operation for cancer of the breast.

#Lower Extremity.#--_The popliteal glands_ include one superficial gland
at the termination of the small saphenous vein, and several deeper ones
in relation to the popliteal vessels. They receive lymph from the toes
and foot, and transmit it to the inguinal glands. _The femoral glands_
lie vertically along the upper part of the great saphenous vein, and
receive lymph from the leg and foot; from them the lymph passes to the
deep inguinal and external iliac glands. The femoral glands often
participate in pyogenic infections entering through the skin of the toes
and sole of the foot. _The superficial inguinal glands_ lie along the
inguinal (Poupart's) ligament, and receive lymph from the external
genitals, anus, perineum, buttock, and anterior abdominal wall. The
lymph passes on to the deep inguinal and external iliac glands. The
superficial glands through their relations to the genitals are
frequently the subject of venereal infection, and also of epithelioma
when this disease affects the genitals or anus; they are rarely the seat
of tuberculosis. _The deep inguinal glands_ lie on the medial side of
the femoral vein, and sometimes within the femoral canal. They receive
lymph from the deep lymphatics of the lower limb, and some of the
efferent vessels from the femoral and superficial inguinal glands. The
lymph then passes on through the femoral canal to the external iliac
glands. The extension of malignant disease, whether cancer or sarcoma,
can often be traced along these deeper lymphatics into the pelvis, and
as the obstruction to the flow of lymph increases there is a
corresponding increase in the swollen dropsical condition of the lower
limb on the same side.

The glands of the _thorax_ and _abdomen_ will be considered with the
surgery of these regions.


INJURIES OF LYMPH VESSELS

Lymph vessels are divided in all wounds, and the lymph that escapes from
them is added to any discharge that may be present. In injuries of
larger trunks the lymph may escape in considerable quantity as a
colourless, watery fluid--_lymphorrhagia_; and the opening through which
it escapes is known as a _lymphatic fistula_. This has been observed
chiefly after extensive operation for the removal of malignant glands in
the groin where there already exists a considerable degree of
obstruction to the lymph stream, and in such cases the lymph, including
that which has accumulated in the vessels of the limb, may escape in
such abundance as to soak through large dressings and delay healing.
Ultimately new lymph channels are formed, so that at the end of from
four to six weeks the discharge of lymph ceases and the wound heals.

_Lymphatic Oedema._--When the lymphatic return from a limb has been
seriously interfered with,--as, for example, when the axillary contents
has been completely cleared out in operating for cancer of the
breast,--a condition of lymphatic oedema may result, the arm becoming
swollen, tight, and heavy.

Various degrees of the conditions are met with; in the severe forms,
there is pain, as well as incapacity of the limb. As in ordinary oedema,
the condition is relieved by elevation of the limb, but not nearly to
the same degree; in time the tissues become so hard and tense as
scarcely to pit on pressure; this is in part due to the formation of new
connective tissue and hypertrophy of the skin; in advanced cases there
is a gradual transition into one form of elephantiasis.

Handley has devised a method of treatment--_lymphangioplasty_--the
object of which is to drain the lymph by embedding a number of silk
threads in the subcutaneous cellular tissue.

#Wounds of the Thoracic Duct.#--The thoracic duct usually opens at the
angle formed by the junction of the left internal jugular and subclavian
veins, but it may open into either of these vessels by one or by several
channels, or the duct may be double throughout its course. There is a
smaller duct on the right side--the right lymphatic duct. The duct or
ducts may be displaced by a tumour or a mass of enlarged glands, and may
be accidentally wounded in dissections at the root of the neck; jets of
milky fluid--chyle--may at once escape from it. The jets are rhythmical
and coincide with expiration. The injury may, however, not be observed
at the time of operation, but later through the dressings being soaked
with chyle--_chylorrhoea_. If the wound involves the only existing main
duct and all the chyle escapes, the patient suffers from intense thirst,
emaciation, and weakness, and may die of inanition; but if, as is
usually the case, only one of several collateral channels is implicated,
the loss of chyle may be of little moment, as the discharge usually
ceases. If the wound heals so that the chyle is prevented from escaping,
a fluctuating swelling may form beneath the scar; in course of time it
gradually disappears.

An attempt should be made to close the wound in the duct by means of a
fine suture; failing this, the duct must be occluded by a ligature as if
it were a bleeding artery. The tissues are then stitched over it and the
skin wound accurately closed, so as to obtain primary union, firm
pressure being applied by dressings and an elastic webbing bandage. Even
if the main duct is obliterated, a collateral circulation is usually
established. A wound of the right lymphatic duct is of less importance.

_Subcutaneous rupture of the thoracic duct_ may result from a crush of
the thorax. The chyle escapes and accumulates in the cellular tissue of
the posterior mediastinum, behind the peritoneum, in the pleural cavity
(_chylo-thorax_), or in the peritoneal cavity (_chylous ascites_). There
are physical signs of fluid in one or other of these situations, but, as
a rule, the nature of the lesion is only recognised when chyle is
withdrawn by the exploring needle.


DISEASES OF LYMPH VESSELS

#Lymphangitis.#--Inflammation of peripheral lymph vessels usually
results from some primary source of pyogenic infection in the skin. This
may be a wound or a purulent blister, and the streptococcus pyogenes is
the organism most frequently present. _Septic_ lymphangitis is commonly
met with in those who, from the nature of their occupation, handle
infective material. A _gonococcal_ form has been observed in those
suffering from gonorrhoea.

The inflammation affects chiefly the walls of the vessels, and is
attended with clotting of the lymph. There is also some degree of
inflammation of the surrounding cellular tissue--_peri-lymphangitis_.
One or more abscesses may form along the course of the vessels, or a
spreading cellulitis may supervene.

The _clinical features_ resemble those of other pyogenic infections, and
there are wavy red lines running from the source of infection towards
the nearest lymph glands. These correspond to the inflamed vessels, and
are the seat of burning pain and tenderness. The associated glands are
enlarged and painful. In severe cases the symptoms merge into those of
septicaemia. When the deep lymph vessels alone are involved, the
superficial red lines are absent, but the limb becomes greatly swollen
and pits on pressure.

In cases of extensive lymphangitis, especially when there are repeated
attacks, the vessels are obliterated by the formation of new connective
tissue and a persistent solid oedema results, culminating in one form of
elephantiasis.

_Treatment._--The primary source of infection is dealt with on the usual
lines. If the lymphangitis affects an extremity, Bier's elastic bandage
is applied, and if suppuration occurs, the pus is let out through one or
more small incisions; in other parts of the body Klapp's suction bells
are employed. An autogenous vaccine may be prepared and injected. When
the condition has subsided, the limb is massaged and evenly bandaged to
promote the disappearance of oedema.

_Tuberculous Lymphangitis._--Although lymph vessels play an important
role in the spread of tuberculosis, the clinical recognition of the
disease in them is exceptional. The infection spreads upwards along the
superficial lymphatics, which become nodularly thickened; at one or more
points, larger, peri-lymphangitic nodules may form and break down into
abscesses and ulcers; the nearest group of glands become infected at an
early stage. When the disease is widely distributed throughout the
lymphatics of the limb, it becomes swollen and hard--a condition
illustrated by lupus elephantiasis.

_Syphilitic lymphangitis_ is observed in cases of primary syphilis, in
which the vessels of the dorsum of the penis can be felt as indurated
cords.

In addition to acting as channels for the conveyance of bacterial
infection, _lymph vessels frequently convey the cells of malignant
tumours_, and especially cancer, from the seat of the primary disease to
the nearest lymph glands, and they may themselves become the seat of
cancerous growth forming nodular cords. The permeation of cancer by way
of the lymphatics, described by Sampson Handley, has already been
referred to.

#Lymphangiectasis# is a dilated or varicose condition of lymph vessels.
It is met with as a congenital affection in the tongue and lips, or it
may be acquired as the result of any condition which is attended with
extensive obliteration or blocking of the main lymph trunks. An
interesting type of lymphangiectasis is that which results from the
presence of the _filaria Bancrofti_ in the vessels, and is observed
chiefly in the groin, spermatic cord, and scrotum of persons who have
lived in the tropics.

_Filarial disease in the lymphatics of the groin_ appears as a soft,
doughy swelling, varying in size from a walnut to a cocoa-nut; it may
partly disappear on pressure and when the patient lies down.

The patient gives a history of feverish attacks of the nature of
lymphangitis during which the swelling becomes painful and tender. These
attacks may show a remarkable periodicity, and each may be followed by
an increase in the size of the swelling, which may extend along the
inguinal canal into the abdomen, or down the spermatic cord into the
scrotum. On dissection, the swelling is found to be made up of dilated,
tortuous, and thickened lymph vessels in which the parent worm is
sometimes found, and of greatly enlarged lymph glands which have
undergone fibrosis, with giant-cell formation and eosinophile
aggregations. The fluid in the dilated vessels is either clear or
turbid, in the latter case resembling chyle. The affection is frequently
bilateral, and may be associated with lymph scrotum, with elephantiasis,
and with chyluria.

The _diagnosis_ is to be made from such other swellings in the groin as
hernia, lipoma, or cystic pouching of the great saphenous vein. It is
confirmed by finding the recently dead or dying worms in the inflamed
lymph glands.

_Treatment._--When the disease is limited to the groin or scrotum,
excision may bring about a permanent cure, but it may result in the
formation of lymphatic sinuses and only afford temporary relief.

#Lymphangioma.#--A lymphangioma is a swelling composed of a series of
cavities and channels filled with lymph and freely communicating with
one another. The cavities result either from the new formation of lymph
spaces or vessels, or from the dilatation of those which already exist;
their walls are composed of fibro-areolar tissue lined by endothelium
and strengthened by non-striped muscle. They are rarely provided with a
definite capsule, and frequently send prolongations of their substance
between and into muscles and other structures in their vicinity. They
are of congenital origin and usually make their appearance at or shortly
after birth. When the tumour is made up of a meshwork of caverns and
channels, it is called a _cavernous lymphangioma_; when it is composed
of one or more cysts, it is called a _cystic lymphangioma_. It is
probable that the cysts are derived from the caverns by breaking down
and absorption of the intervening septa, as transition forms between the
cavernous and cystic varieties are sometimes met with.

The _cavernous lymphangioma_ appears as an ill-defined, soft swelling,
presenting many of the characters of a subcutaneous haemangioma, but it
is not capable of being emptied by pressure, it does not become tense
when the blood pressure is raised, as in crying, and if the tumour is
punctured, it yields lymph instead of blood. It also resembles a lipoma,
especially the congenital variety which grows from the periosteum, and
the differential diagnosis between these is rarely completed until the
swelling is punctured or explored by operation. If treatment is called
for, it is carried out on the same lines as for haemangioma, by means of
electrolysis, igni-puncture, or excision. Complete excision is rarely
possible because of the want of definition and encapsulation, but it is
not necessary for cure, as the parts that remain undergo cicatrisation.

[Illustration: FIG. 76.--Congenital Cystic Tumour or Hygroma of Axilla.

(From a photograph lent by Dr. Lediard.)]

The _cystic lymphangioma_, _lymphatic cyst_, or _congenital cystic
hygroma_ is most often met with in the neck--_hydrocele of the neck_; it
is situated beneath the deep fascia, and projects either in front of or
behind the sterno-mastoid muscle. It may attain a large size, the
overlying skin and cyst wall may be so thin as to be translucent, and it
has been known to cause serious impairment of respiration through
pressing on the trachea. In the axilla also the cystic tumour may attain
a considerable size (Fig. 76); less frequent situations are the groin,
and the floor of the mouth, where it constitutes one form of ranula.

The nature of these swellings is to be recognised by their situation, by
their having existed from infancy, and, if necessary, by drawing off
some of the contents of the cyst through a fine needle. They are usually
remarkably indolent, persisting often for a long term of years without
change, and, like the haemangioma, they sometimes undergo spontaneous
cicatrisation and cure. Sometimes the cystic tumour becomes infected and
forms an abscess--another, although less desirable, method of cure.
Those situated in the neck are most liable to suppurate, probably
because of pyogenic organisms being brought to them by the lymphatics
taking origin in the scalp, ear, or throat.

If operative interference is called for, the cysts may be tapped and
injected with iodine, or excised; the operation for removal may entail a
considerable dissection amongst the deeper structures at the root of the
neck, and should not be lightly undertaken; parts left behind may be
induced to cicatrise by inserting a tube of radium and leaving it for a
few days.

Lymphangiomas are met with in the abdomen in the form of _omental
cysts_.


DISEASES OF LYMPH GLANDS

#Lymphadenitis.#--Inflammation of lymph glands results from the advent
of an irritant, usually bacterial or toxic, brought to the glands by the
afferent lymph vessels. These vessels may share in the inflammation and
be the seat of lymphangitis, or they may show no evidence of the passage
of the noxa. It is exceptional for the irritant to reach the gland
through the blood-stream.

A strain or other form of trauma is sometimes blamed for the onset of
lymphadenitis, especially in the glands of the groin (bubo), but it is
usually possible to discover some source of pyogenic infection which is
responsible for the mischief, or to obtain a history of some antecedent
infection such as gonorrhoea. It is possible for gonococci to lie latent
in the inguinal glands for long periods, and only give rise to
lymphadenitis if the glands be subsequently subjected to injury. The
glands most frequently affected are those in the neck, axilla, and
groin.

The characters of the lymphadenitis vary with the nature of the
irritant. Sometimes it is mild and evanescent, as in the glandular
enlargement in the neck which attends tonsillitis and other forms of
sore throat. Sometimes it is more persistent, as in the enlargement
that is associated with adenoids, hypertrophied tonsils, carious teeth,
eczema of the scalp, and otorrhoea; and it is possible that this indolent
enlargement predisposes to tuberculous infection. A similar enlargement
is met with in the axilla in cases of chronic interstitial mastitis, and
in the groin as a result of chronic irritation about the external
genitals, such as balanitis.

Sometimes the lymphadenitis is of an acute character, and the tendency
is towards the formation of an abscess. This is illustrated in the
axillary glands as a result of infected wounds of the fingers; in the
femoral glands in infected wounds or purulent blisters on the foot; in
the inguinal glands in gonorrhoea and soft sore; and in the cervical
glands in the severer forms of sore throat associated with diphtheria
and scarlet fever. The most acute suppurations result from infection
with streptococci.

Superficial glands, when inflamed and suppurating, become enlarged,
tender, fixed, and matted to one another. In the glands of the groin the
suppurative process is often remarkably sluggish; purulent foci form in
the interior of individual glands, and some time may elapse before the
pus erupts through their respective capsules. In the deeply placed
cervical glands, especially in cases of streptococcal throat infections,
the suppuration rapidly involves the surrounding cellular tissue, and
the clinical features are those of an acute cellulitis and deeply seated
abscess. When this is incised the necrosed glands may be found lying in
the pus, and on bacteriological examination are found to be swarming
with streptococci. In suppuration of the axillary glands the abscess may
be quite superficial, or it may be deeply placed beneath the strong
fascia and pectoral muscles, according to the group of glands involved.

The _diagnosis_ of septic lymphadenitis is usually easy. The indolent
enlargements are not always to be distinguished, however, from
commencing tuberculous disease, except by the use of the tuberculin
test, and by the fact that they usually disappear on removing the
peripheral source of irritation.

_Treatment._--The first indication is to discover and deal with the
source of infection, and in the indolent forms of lymphadenitis this
will usually be followed by recovery. In the acute forms following on
pyogenic infection, the best results are obtained from the hyperaemic
treatment carried out by means of suction bells. If suppuration is not
thereby prevented, or if it has already taken place, each separate
collection of pus is punctured with a narrow-bladed knife and the use of
the suction bell is persevered with. If there is a large periglandular
abscess, as is often the case, in the neck and axilla, the opening may
require to be made by Hilton's method, and it may be necessary to insert
a drainage-tube.

[Illustration: FIG. 77.--Tuberculous Cervical Gland with abscess
formation in subcutaneous cellular tissue, in a boy aet. 10.]

#Tuberculous Disease of Glands.#--This is a disease of great frequency
and importance. The tubercle bacilli usually gain access to the gland
through the afferent lymph vessels, which convey them from some lesion
of the surface within the area drained by them. Tuberculous infection
may supervene in glands that are already enlarged as a result of chronic
septic irritation. While any of the glands in the body may be affected,
the disease is most often met with in the cervical groups which derive
their lymph from the mouth, nose, throat, and ear.

_The appearance of the glands on section_ varies with the stage of the
disease. In the early stages the gland is enlarged, it may be to many
times its natural size, is normal in appearance and consistence, and as
there is no peri-adenitis it is easily shelled out from its
surroundings. On microscopical examination, however, there is evidence
of infection in the shape of bacilli and of characteristic giant and
epithelioid cells. At a later stage, the gland tissue is studded with
minute yellow foci which tend to enlarge and in time to become
confluent, so that the whole gland is ultimately converted into a
caseous mass. This caseous material is surrounded by the thickened
capsule which, as a result of peri-adenitis, tends to become adherent to
and fused with surrounding structures, and particularly with layers of
fascia and with the walls of veins. The caseated tissue often remains
unchanged for long periods; it may become calcified, but more frequently
it breaks down and liquefies.

#Tuberculous disease in the cervical glands# is a common accompaniment
or sequel of adenoids, enlarged tonsils, carious teeth, pharyngitis,
middle-ear disease, and conjunctivitis. These lesions afford the bacilli
a chance of entry into the lymph vessels, in which they are carried to
the glands, where they give rise to disease.

The enlargement may affect only one gland, usually below the angle of
the mandible, and remain confined to it, the gland reaching the size of
a hazel-nut, and being ovoid, firm, and painless. More commonly the
disease affects several glands, on one or on both sides of the neck.
When the disease commences in the pre-auricular or submaxillary glands,
it tends to spread to those along the carotid sheath: when the posterior
auricular and occipital glands are first involved, the spread is to
those along the posterior border of the sterno-mastoid. In many cases
all the chains in front of, beneath, and behind this muscle are
involved, the enlarged glands extending from the mastoid to the
clavicle. They are at first discrete and movable, and may even vary in
size from time to time; but with the addition of peri-adenitis they
become fixed and matted together, forming lobulated or nodular masses
(Fig. 78). They become adherent not only to one another, but also to the
structures in their vicinity,--and notably to the internal jugular
vein,--a point of importance in regard to their removal by operation.

At any stage the disease may be arrested and the glands remain for long
periods without further change. It is possible that the tuberculous
tissue may undergo cicatrisation. More commonly suppuration ensues, and
a cold abscess forms, but if there is a mixed infection, the pyogenic
factor being usually derived from the throat, it may take on active
features.

[Illustration: FIG. 78.--Mass of Tuberculous Glands removed from Axilla
(cf. Fig. 79).]

The transition from the solid to the liquefied stage is attended with
pain and tenderness in the gland, which at the same time becomes fixed
and globular, and finally fluctuation can be elicited.

If left to itself, the softened tubercle erupts through the capsule of
the gland and infects the cellular tissue. The cervical fascia is
perforated and a cold abscess, often much larger than the gland from
which it took origin, forms between the fascia and the overlying skin.
The further stages--reddening, undermining of skin and external rupture,
with the formation of ulcers and sinuses--have been described with
tuberculous abscess. The ulcers and sinuses persist indefinitely, or
they heal and then break out again; sometimes the skin becomes infected,
and a condition like lupus spreads over a considerable area. Spontaneous
healing finally takes place after the caseous tubercle has been
extruded; the resulting scars are extremely unsightly, being puckered or
bridled, or hypertrophied like keloid.

While the disease is most common in childhood and youth, it may be met
with even in advanced life; and although often associated with impaired
health and unhealthy surroundings, it may affect those who are
apparently robust and are in affluent circumstances.

_Diagnosis._--The chief importance lies in differentiating tuberculous
disease from lympho-sarcoma and from lymphadenoma, and this is usually
possible from the history and from the nature of the enlargement. Signs
of liquefaction and suppuration support the diagnosis of tubercle. If
any doubt remains, one of the glands should be removed and submitted to
microscopical examination. Other forms of sarcoma, and the enlargement
of an accessory thyreoid, are less likely to be confused with
tuberculous glands. Calcified tuberculous glands give definite shadows
with the X-rays.

Enlargement of the cervical glands from secondary cancer may simulate
tuberculosis, but is differentiated by its association with cancer in
the mouth or throat, and by the characteristic, stone-like induration of
epithelioma.

The cold abscess which results from tuberculous glands is to be
distinguished from that due to disease in the cervical spine,
retro-pharyngeal abscess, as well as from congenital and other cystic
swellings in the neck.

_Prognosis._--Next to lupus, glandular disease is of all tuberculous
lesions the least dangerous to life; but while it is the rule to recover
from tuberculous disease of glands with or without an operation, it is
unfortunately quite common for such persons to become the subjects of
tuberculosis in other parts of the body at any subsequent period of
life.

_Treatment._--There is considerable difference of opinion regarding the
treatment of glandular tuberculosis. Some authorities, impressed with
the undoubted possibility of natural cure, are satisfied with promoting
this by measures directed towards improving the general health, by the
prolonged administration of tuberculin, and by repeated exposures to the
X-rays and to sunlight. Others again, influenced by the risk of
extension of the disease and by the destruction of tissue and
disfigurement caused by breaking down of the tuberculous tissue and
mixed infection, advocate the removal of the glands by operation.

The conditions vary widely in different cases, and the treatment should
be adapted to the individual requirements. If the disease remains
confined to the glands originally infected and there are no signs of
breaking down, "expectant measures" may be persevered with.

[Illustration: FIG. 79.--Tuberculous Axillary Glands (cf. Fig. 78).]

If, on the other hand, the disease exhibits aggressive tendencies, the
question of operation should be considered. The undesirable results of
the breaking down and liquefaction of the diseased gland may be avoided
by the timely withdrawal of the fluid contents through a hollow needle.

_The excision of tuberculous glands_ is often a difficult operation,
because of the number and deep situation of the glands to be removed,
and of the adhesions to surrounding structures. The skin incision must
be sufficiently extensive to give access to the whole of the affected
area, and to avoid disfigurement should, whenever possible, be made in
the line of the natural creases of the skin. In exposing the glands the
common facial and other venous trunks may require to be clamped and
tied. Care must be taken not to injure the important nerves,
particularly the accessory, the vagus, and the phrenic. The
inframaxillary branches of the facial, the hypoglossal and its
descending branches, and the motor branches of the deep cervical plexus,
are also liable to be injured. The dissection is rendered easier and is
attended with less risk of injury to the nerves, if the patient is
placed in the sitting posture so as to empty the veins, and, instead of
a knife, the conical scissors of Mayo are employed. When the glands are
extensively affected on both sides of the neck, it is advisable to allow
an interval to elapse rather than to operate on both sides at one
sitting. (_Op. Surg._, p. 189.)

If the tonsils are enlarged they should not be removed at the same time,
as, by so doing, there is a risk of pyogenic infection from the throat
being carried to the wound in the neck, but they should be removed,
after an interval, to prevent relapse of disease in the glands.

_When the skin is broken_ and caseous tuberculous tissue is exposed,
healing is promoted by cutting away diseased skin, removing the
granulation tissue with the spoon, scraping sinuses, and packing the
cavity with iodoform worsted and treating it by the open method and
secondary suture if necessary. Exposure to the sunshine on the seashore
and to the X-rays is often beneficial in these cases.

#Tuberculous disease in the axillary glands# may be a result of
extension from those in the neck, from the mamma, ribs, or sternum, or
more rarely from the upper extremity. We have seen it from an infected
wound of a finger. In some cases no source of infection is discoverable.
The individual glands attain a considerable size, and they fuse together
to form a large tumour which fills up the axillary space. The disease
progresses more rapidly than it does in the cervical glands, and almost
always goes on to suppuration with the formation of sinuses.
Conservative measures need not be considered, as the only satisfactory
treatment is excision, and that without delay.

#Leucocythaemia.#--This is a disease of the blood and of the
blood-forming organs, in which there is a great increase in the number,
and an alteration of the character, of the leucocytes present in the
blood. It may simulate lymphadenoma, because, in certain forms of the
disease, the lymph glands, especially those in the neck, axilla, and
groin, are greatly enlarged.


TUMOURS OF LYMPH GLANDS

#Primary Tumours.#--_Lympho-sarcoma_, which may be regarded as a sarcoma
starting in a lymph gland, appears in the neck, axilla, or groin as a
rapidly growing tumour consisting of one enlarged gland with numerous
satellites. As the tumour increases in size, the sarcomatous tissue
erupts through the capsule of the gland, and infiltrates the surrounding
tissues, whereby it becomes fixed to these and to the skin.

[Illustration: FIG. 82.--Lympho-Sarcoma removed from Groin. It will be
observed that there is one large central parent tumour surrounded by
satellites.]

The prognosis is grave in the extreme, and the only hope is in early
excision, followed by the use of radium and X-rays. We have observed a
case of lympho-sarcoma above the clavicle, in which excision of all that
was removable, followed by the insertion of a tube of radium for ten
days, was followed by a disappearance of the disease over a period which
extended to nearly five years, when death resulted from a tumour in the
mediastinum. In a second case in which the growth was in the groin, the
patient, a young man, remained well for over two years and was then lost
sight of.

#Secondary Tumours.#--Next to tuberculosis, _secondary cancer_ is the
most common disease of lymph glands. In the neck it is met with in
association with epithelioma of the lip, tongue, or fauces. The glands
form tumours of variable size, and are often larger than the primary
growth, the characters of which they reproduce. The glands are at first
movable, but soon become fixed both to each other and to their
surroundings; when fixed to the mandible they form a swelling of
bone-like hardness; in time they soften, liquefy, and burst through the
skin, forming foul, fungating ulcers. A similar condition is met with in
the groin from epithelioma of the penis, scrotum, or vulva. In cancer of
the breast, the infection of the axillary glands is an important
complication.

In _pigmented_ or _melanotic cancers_ of the skin, the glands are early
infected and increase rapidly, so that, when the primary growth is still
of small size--as, for example, on the sole of the foot--the femoral
glands may already constitute large pigmented tumours.

[Illustration: FIG. 83.--Cancerous Glands in Neck secondary to
Epithelioma of Lip.

(Mr. G. L. Chiene's case.)]

The implication of the glands in other forms of cancer will be
considered with regional surgery.

_Secondary sarcoma_ is seldom met with in the lymph glands except when
the primary growth is a lympho-sarcoma and is situated in the tonsil,
thyreoid, or testicle.




CHAPTER XVI

THE NERVES


Anatomy--INJURIES OF NERVES: Changes in nerves after division;
    Repair and its modifications; Clinical features; _Primary and
    secondary suture_--SUBCUTANEOUS INJURIES OF
    NERVES--DISEASES: _Neuritis_; _Tumours_--Surgery of
    the individual nerves: _Brachial neuralgia_; _Sciatica_;
    _Trigeminal neuralgia_.

#Anatomy.#--A nerve-trunk is made up of a variable number of bundles of
nerve fibres surrounded and supported by a framework of connective
tissue. The nerve fibres are chiefly of the medullated type, and they
run without interruption from a nerve cell or _neuron_ in the brain or
spinal medulla to their peripheral terminations in muscle, skin, and
secretory glands.

Each nerve fibre consists of a number of nerve fibrils collected into a
central bundle--the axis cylinder--which is surrounded by an envelope,
the neurolemma or sheath of Schwann. Between the neurolemma and the axis
cylinder is the medullated sheath, composed of a fatty substance known
as myelin. This medullated sheath is interrupted at the nodes of
Ranvier, and in each internode is a nucleus lying between the myelin and
the neurolemma. The axis cylinder is the essential conducting structure
of the nerve, while the neurolemma and the myelin act as insulating
agents. The axis cylinder depends for its nutrition on the central
neuron with which it is connected, and from which it originally
developed, and it degenerates if it is separated from its neuron.

The connective-tissue framework of a nerve-trunk consists of the
_perineurium_, or general sheath, which surrounds all the bundles; the
_epineurium_, surrounding individual groups of bundles; and the
_endoneurium_, a delicate connective tissue separating the individual
nerve fibres. The blood vessels and lymphatics run in these
connective-tissue sheaths.

According to Head and his co-workers, Sherren and Rivers, the afferent
fibres in the peripheral nerves can be divided into three systems:--

1. Those which subserve _deep sensibility_ and conduct the impulses
produced by pressure as well as those which enable the patient to
recognise the position of a joint on passive movement (joint-sensation),
and the kinaesthetic sense, which recognises that active contraction of
the muscle is taking place (active muscle-sensation). The fibres of this
system run with the motor nerves, and pass to muscles, tendons, and
joints. Even division of both the ulnar and the median nerves above the
wrist produces little loss of deep sensibility, unless the tendons are
also cut through. The failure to recognise this form of sensibility has
been largely responsible for the conflicting statements as to the
sensory phenomena following operations for the repair of divided nerves.

2. Those which subserve _protopathic_ sensibility--that is, are capable
of responding to painful cutaneous stimuli and to the extremes of heat
and cold. These also endow the hairs with sensibility to pain. They are
the first to regenerate after division.

3. Those which subserve _epicritic_ sensibility, the most highly
specialised, capable of appreciating light touch, _e.g._ with a wisp of
cotton wool, as a well-localised sensation, and the finer grades of
temperature, called cool and warm (72 o-104 o F.), and of discriminating
as separate the points of a pair of compasses 2 cms. apart. These are
the last to regenerate.

A nerve also exerts a trophic influence on the tissues in which it is
distributed.

The researches of Stoffel on the minute anatomy of the larger nerves,
and the disposition in them of the bundles of nerve fibres supplying
different groups of muscles, have opened up what promises to be a
fruitful field of clinical investigation and therapeutics. He has shown
that in the larger nerve-trunks the nerve bundles for special groups of
muscles are not, as was formerly supposed, arranged irregularly and
fortuitously, but that on the contrary the nerve fibres to a particular
group of muscles have a typical and practically constant position within
the nerve.

In the large nerve-trunks of the limbs he has worked out the exact
position of the bundles for the various groups of muscles, so that in a
cross section of a particular nerve the component bundles can be
labelled as confidently and accurately as can be the cortical areas in
the brain. In the living subject, by using a fine needle-like electrode
and a very weak galvanic current, he has been able to differentiate the
nerve bundles for the various groups of muscles. In several cases of
spastic paralysis he succeeded in picking out in the nerve-trunk of the
affected limb the nerve bundles supplying the spastic muscles, and, by
resecting portions of them, in relieving the spasm. In a case of spastic
contracture of the pronator muscles of the forearm, for example, an
incision is made along the line of the median nerve above the bend of
the elbow. At the lateral side of the median nerve, where it lies in
contact with the biceps muscle, is situated a well-defined and easily
isolated bundle of fibres which supplies the pronator teres, the flexor
carpi radialis, and the palmaris longus muscles. On incising the sheath
of the nerve this bundle can be readily dissected up and its identity
confirmed by stimulating it with a very weak galvanic current. An inch
or more of the bundle is then resected.


INJURIES OF NERVES

Nerves are liable to be cut or torn across, bruised, compressed,
stretched, or torn away from their connections with the spinal medulla.

#Complete Division of a Mixed Nerve.#--Complete division is a common
result of accidental wounds, especially above the wrist, where the
ulnar, median, and radial nerves are frequently cut across, and in
gun-shot injuries.

_Changes in Structure and Function._--The mere interruption of the
continuity of a nerve results in degeneration of its fibres, the myelin
being broken up into droplets and absorbed, while the axis cylinders
swell up, disintegrate, and finally disappear. Both the conducting and
the insulating elements are thus lost. The degeneration in the central
end of the divided nerve is usually limited to the immediate proximity
of the lesion, and does not even involve all the nerve fibres. In the
distal end, it extends throughout the entire peripheral distribution of
the nerve, and appears to be due to the cutting off of the fibres from
their trophic nerve cells in the spinal medulla. Immediate suturing of
the ends does not affect the degeneration of the distal segment. The
peripheral end undergoes complete degeneration in from six weeks to two
months.

The physiological effects of complete division are that the muscles
supplied by the nerve are immediately paralysed, the area to which it
furnishes the sole cutaneous supply becomes insensitive, and the other
structures, including tendons, bones, and joints, lose sensation, and
begin to atrophy from loss of the trophic influence.

#Nerves divided in Amputation.#--In the case of nerves divided in an
amputation, there is an active, although necessarily abortive, attempt
at regeneration, which results in the formation of bulbous swellings at
the cut ends of the nerves. When there has been suppuration, and
especially if the nerves have been cut so as to be exposed in the wound,
these bulbous swellings may attain an abnormal size, and are then known
as "amputation" or "stump neuromas" (Fig. 84).

When the nerves in a stump have not been cut sufficiently short, they
may become involved in the cicatrix, and it may be necessary, on account
of pain, to free them from their adhesions, and to resect enough of the
terminal portions to prevent them again becoming adherent. When this is
difficult, a portion may be resected from each of the nerve-trunks at a
higher level; and if this fails to give relief, a fresh amputation may
be performed. When there is agonising pain dependent upon an ascending
neuritis, it may be necessary to resect the corresponding posterior
nerve roots within the vertebral canal.

[Illustration: FIG. 84.--Stump Neuromas of Sciatic Nerve, excised forty
years after the original amputation by Mr. A. G. Miller.]

#Other Injuries of Nerves.#--_Contusion_ of a nerve-trunk is attended
with extravasation of blood into the connective-tissue sheaths, and is
followed by degeneration of the contused nerve fibres. Function is
usually restored, the conducting paths being re-established by the
formation of new nerve fibres.

When a nerve is _torn across_ or badly _crushed_--as, for example, by a
fractured bone--the changes are similar to those in a divided nerve, and
the ultimate result depends on the amount of separation between the ends
and the possibility of the young axis cylinders bridging the gap.

_Involvement of Nerves in Scar Tissue._--Pressure or traction may be
exerted upon a nerve by contracting scar tissue, or a process of
neuritis or perineuritis may be induced.

When terminal filaments are involved in a scar, it is best to dissect
out the scar, and along with it the ends of the nerves pressed upon.
When a nerve-trunk, such as the sciatic, is involved in cicatricial
tissue, the nerve must be exposed and freed from its surroundings
(_neurolysis_), and then stretched so as to tear any adhesions that may
be present above or below the part exposed. It may be advisable to
displace the liberated nerve from its original position so as to
minimise the risk of its incorporation in the scar of the original wound
or in that resulting from the operation--for example, the radial nerve
may be buried in the substance of the triceps, or it may be surrounded
by a segment of vein or portion of fat-bearing fascia.

_Injuries of nerves resulting from_ #gun-shot wounds# include: (1) those
in which the nerve is directly damaged by the bullet, and (2) those in
which the nerve-trunk is involved secondarily either by scar tissue in
its vicinity or by callus following fracture of an adjacent bone. The
primary injuries include contusion, partial or complete division, and
perforation of the nerve-trunk. One of the most constant symptoms is the
early occurrence of severe neuralgic pain, and this is usually
associated with marked hyperaesthesia.

#Regeneration.#--_Process of Repair when the Ends are in Contact._--_If
the wound is aseptic_, and the ends of the divided nerve are sutured or
remain in contact, they become united, and the conducting paths are
re-established by a regeneration of nerve fibres. There is a difference
of opinion as to the method of regeneration. The Wallerian doctrine is
that the axis cylinders in the central end grow downwards, and enter the
nerve sheaths of the distal portion, and continue growing until they
reach the peripheral terminations in muscle and skin, and in course of
time acquire a myelin sheath; the cells of the neurolemma multiply and
form long chains in both ends of the nerve, and are believed to provide
for the nourishment and support of the actively lengthening axis
cylinders. Another view is that the formation of new axis cylinders is
not confined to the central end, but that it goes on also in the
peripheral segment, in which, however, the new axis cylinders do not
attain maturity until continuity with the central end has been
re-established.

_If the wound becomes infected_ and suppuration occurs, the young nerve
fibres are destroyed and efficient regeneration is prevented; the
formation of scar tissue also may constitute a permanent obstacle to new
nerve fibres bridging the gap.

_When the ends are not in contact_, reunion of the divided nerve fibres
does not take place whether the wound is infected or not. At the
proximal end there forms a bulbous swelling, which becomes adherent to
the scar tissue. It consists of branching axis cylinders running in all
directions, these having failed to reach the distal end because of the
extent of the gap. The peripheral end is completely degenerated, and is
represented by a fibrous cord, the cut end of which is often slightly
swollen or bulbous, and is also incorporated with the scar tissue of
the wound.

#Clinical Features.#--The symptoms resulting from division and non-union
of a nerve-trunk necessarily vary with the functions of the affected
nerve. The following description refers to a mixed sensori-motor trunk,
such as the median or radial (musculo-spiral) nerve.

_Sensory Phenomena._--Superficial touch is tested by means of a wisp of
cotton wool stroked gently across the skin; the capacity of
discriminating two points as separate, by a pair of blunt-pointed
compasses; the sensation of pressure, by means of a pencil or other
blunt object; of pain, by pricking or scratching with a needle; and of
sensibility to heat and cold, by test-tubes containing water at
different temperatures. While these tests are being carried out, the
patient's eyes are screened off.

After division of a nerve containing sensory fibres, there is an area of
absolute cutaneous insensibility to touch (anaesthesia), to pain
(analgesia), and to all degrees of temperature--_loss of protopathic
sensibility_; surrounded by an area in which there is loss of sensation
to light touch, inability to recognise minor differences of temperature
(72 o-104 o F.), and to appreciate as separate impressions the contact of
the two points of a compass--_loss of epicritic sensibility_ (Head and
Sherren) (Figs. 91, 92).

_Motor Phenomena._--There is immediate and complete loss of voluntary
power in the muscles supplied by the divided nerve. The muscles rapidly
waste, and within from three to five days, they cease to react to the
faradic current. When tested with the galvanic current, it is found that
a stronger current must be used to call forth contraction than in a
healthy muscle, and the contraction appears first at the closing of the
circuit when the anode is used as the testing electrode. The loss of
excitability to the interrupted current, and the specific alteration in
the type of contraction with the constant current, is known as the
_reaction of degeneration_. After a few weeks all electric excitability
is lost. The paralysed muscles undergo fatty degeneration, which attains
its maximum three or four months after the division of the nerve.
Further changes may take place, and result in the transformation of the
muscle into fibrous tissue, which by undergoing shortening may cause
deformity known as _paralytic contracture_.

_Vaso-motor Phenomena._--In the majority of cases there is an initial
rise in the temperature of the part (2 o to 3 o F.), with redness and
increased vascularity. This is followed by a fall in the local
temperature, which may amount to 8 o or 10 o F., the parts becoming pale
and cold. Sometimes the hyperaemia resulting from vaso-motor paralysis is
more persistent, and is associated with swelling of the parts from
oedema--the so-called _angio-neurotic oedema_. The vascularity varies with
external influences, and in cold weather the parts present a bluish
appearance.

_Trophic Phenomena._--Owing to the disappearance of the subcutaneous
fat, the skin is smooth and thin, and may be abnormally dry. The hair is
harsh, dry, and easily shed. The nails become brittle and furrowed, or
thick and curved, and the ends of the fingers become club-shaped. Skin
eruptions, especially in the form of blisters, occur, or there may be
actual ulcers of the skin, especially in winter. In aggravated cases the
tips of the fingers disappear from progressive ulceration, and in the
sole of the foot a perforating ulcer may develop. Arthropathies are
occasionally met with, the joints becoming the seat of a painless
effusion or hydrops, which is followed by fibrous thickening of the
capsular and other ligaments, and terminates in stiffness and fibrous
ankylosis. In this way the fingers are seriously crippled and deformed.

#Treatment of Divided Nerves.#--The treatment consists in approximating
the divided ends of the nerve and placing them under the most favourable
conditions for repair, and this should be done at the earliest possible
opportunity. (_Op. Surg._, pp. 45, 46.)

#Primary Suture.#--The reunion of a recently divided nerve is spoken of
as primary suture, and for its success asepsis is essential. As the
suturing of the ends of the nerve is extremely painful, an anaesthetic is
required.

When the wound is healed and while waiting for the restoration of
function, measures are employed to maintain the nutrition of the damaged
nerve and of the parts supplied by it. The limb is exercised, massaged,
and douched, and protected from cold and other injurious influences. The
nutrition of the paralysed muscles is further improved by electricity.
The galvanic current is employed, using at first a mild current of not
more than 5 milliamperes for about ten minutes, the current being made
to flow downwards in the course of the nerve, with the positive
electrode applied to the spine, and the negative over the affected nerve
near its termination. It is an advantage to have a metronome in the
circuit whereby the current is opened and closed automatically at
intervals, so as to cause contraction of the muscles.

_The results_ of primary suture, when it has been performed under
favourable conditions, are usually satisfactory. In a series of cases
investigated by Head and Sherren, the period between the operation and
the first return of sensation averaged 65 days. According to Purves
Stewart protopathic sensation commences to appear in about six weeks and
is completely restored in six months; electric sensation and motor power
reappear together in about six months, and restoration is complete in a
year. When sensation returns, the area of insensibility to pain steadily
diminishes and disappears; sensibility to extremes of temperature
appears soon after; and last of all, after a considerable interval,
there is simultaneous return of appreciation of light touch, moderate
degrees of temperature, and the points of a compass.

A clinical means of estimating how regeneration in a divided nerve is
progressing has been described by Tinel. He found that a tingling
sensation, similar to that experienced in the foot, when it is
recovering from the "sleeping" condition induced by prolonged pressure
on the sciatic nerve from sitting on a hard bench, can be elicited on
percussing over _growing_ axis cylinders. Tapping over the proximal end
of a _newly divided nerve_, _e.g._ the common peroneal behind the head
of the fibula, produces no tingling, but when in about three weeks
axis cylinders begin to grow in the proximal end-bulb, local tingling is
induced by tapping there. The downward growth of the axis cylinders can
be traced by tapping over the distal segment of the nerve, the tingling
sensation being elicited as far down as the young axis cylinders have
reached. When the regeneration of the axis cylinders is complete,
tapping no longer causes tingling. It usually takes about one hundred
days for this stage to be reached.

Tinel's sign is present before voluntary movement, muscular tone, or the
normal electrical reactions reappear.

In cases of complete nerve paralysis that have not been operated upon,
the tingling test is helpful in determining whether or not regeneration
is taking place. Its detection may prevent an unnecessary operation
being performed.

Primary suture should not be attempted so long as the wound shows signs
of infection, as it is almost certain to end in failure. The ends should
be sutured, however, as soon as the wound is aseptic or has healed.

#Secondary Suture.#--The term secondary suture is applied to the
operation of stitching the ends of the divided nerve after the wound has
healed.

_Results of Secondary Suture._--When secondary suture has been performed
under favourable conditions, the prognosis is good, but a longer time is
required for restoration of function than after primary suture. Purves
Stewart says protopathic sensation is sometimes observed much earlier
than in primary suture, because partial regeneration of axis cylinders
in the peripheral segment has already taken place. Sensation is
recovered first, but it seldom returns before three or four months.
There then follows an improvement or disappearance of any trophic
disturbances that may be present. Recovery of motion may be deferred for
long periods--rather because of the changes in the muscles than from
want of conductivity in the nerve--and if the muscles have undergone
complete degeneration, it may never take place at all. While waiting for
recovery, every effort should be made to maintain the nutrition of the
damaged nerve, and of the parts which it supplies.

When suture is found to be impossible, recourse must be had to other
methods, known as nerve bridging and nerve implantation.

#Incomplete Division of a Mixed Nerve.#--The effects of partial division
of a mixed nerve vary according to the destination of the nerve bundles
that have been interrupted. Within their area of distribution the
paralysis is as complete as if the whole trunk had been cut across. The
uninjured nerve-bundles continue to transmit impulses with the result
that there is a _dissociated paralysis_ within the distribution of the
affected nerve, some muscles continuing to act and to respond normally
to electric stimulation, while others behave as if the whole nerve-trunk
had been severed.

In addition to vasomotor and trophic changes, there is often severe pain
of a burning kind (_causalgia_ or _thermalgia_) which comes on about a
fortnight after the injury and causes intense and continuous suffering
which may last for months. Paroxysms of pain may be excited by the
slightest touch or by heat, and the patient usually learns for himself
that the constant application of cold wet cloths allays the pain. The
thermalgic area sweats profusely.

Operative treatment is indicated where there is no sign of improvement
within three months, when recovery is arrested before complete
restoration of function is attained, or when thermalgic pain is
excessive.

#Subcutaneous Injuries of Nerves.#--Several varieties of subcutaneous
injuries of nerves are met with. One of the best known is the
compression paralysis of the nerves of the upper arm which results from
sleeping with the arm resting on the back of a chair or the edge of a
table--the so-called "drunkard's palsy"; and from the pressure of a
crutch in the axilla--"crutch paralysis." In some of these injuries,
notably "drunkard's palsy," the disability appears to be due not to
damage of the nerve, but to overstretching of the extensors of the wrist
and fingers (Jones). A similar form of paralysis is sometimes met with
from the pressure of a tourniquet, from tight bandages or splints, from
the pressure exerted by a dislocated bone or by excessive callus, and
from hyper-extension of the arm during anaesthesia.

In all these forms there is impaired sensation, rarely amounting to
anaesthesia, marked muscular wasting, and diminution or loss of voluntary
motor power, while--and this is a point of great importance--the normal
electrical reactions are preserved. There may also develop trophic
changes such as blisters, superficial ulcers, and clubbing of the tips
of the fingers. The prognosis is usually favourable, as recovery is the
rule within from one to three months. If, however, neuritis supervenes,
the electrical reactions are altered, the muscles degenerate, and
recovery may be retarded or may fail to take place.

Injuries which act abruptly or instantaneously are illustrated in the
crushing of a nerve by the sudden displacement of a sharp-edged fragment
of bone, as may occur in comminuted fractures of the humerus. The
symptoms include perversion or loss of sensation, motor paralysis, and
atrophy of muscles, which show the reaction of degeneration from the
eighth day onwards. The presence of the reaction of degeneration
influences both the prognosis and the treatment, for it implies a lesion
which is probably incapable of spontaneous recovery, and which can only
be remedied by operation.

The _treatment_ varies with the cause and nature of the lesion. When,
for example, a displaced bone or a mass of callus is pressing upon the
nerve, steps must be taken to relieve the pressure, by operation if
necessary. When there is reason to believe that the nerve is severely
crushed or torn across, it should be exposed by incision, and, after
removal of the damaged ends, should be united by sutures. When it is
impossible to make a definite diagnosis as to the state of the nerve, it
is better to expose it by operation, and thus learn the exact state of
affairs without delay; in the event of the nerve being torn, the ends
should be united by sutures.

#Dislocation of Nerves.#--This injury, which resembles the dislocation
of tendons from their grooves, is seldom met with except in the ulnar
nerve at the elbow, and is described with injuries of that nerve.


DISEASES OF NERVES

#Traumatic Neuritis.#--This consists in an overgrowth of the
connective-tissue framework of a nerve, which causes irritation and
pressure upon the nerve fibres, sometimes resulting in their
degeneration. It may originate in connection with a wound in the
vicinity of a nerve, as, for example, when the brachial nerves are
involved in scar tissue subsequent to an operation for clearing out the
axilla for cancer; or in contusion and compression of a nerve--for
example, by the pressure of the head of the humerus in a dislocation of
the shoulder. Some weeks or months after the injury, the patient
complains of increasing hyperaesthesia and of neuralgic pains in the
course of the nerve. The nerve is very sensitive to pressure, and, if
superficial, may be felt to be swollen. The associated muscles are
wasted and weak, and are subject to twitchings. There are also trophic
disturbances. It is rare to have complete sensory and motor paralysis.
The disease is commonest in the nerves of the upper extremity, and the
hand may become crippled and useless.

_Treatment._--Any constitutional condition which predisposes to
neuritis, such as gout, diabetes, or syphilis, must receive appropriate
treatment. The symptoms may be relieved by rest and by soothing
applications, such as belladonna, ichthyol, or menthol, by the use of
hot-air and electric baths, and in obstinate cases by blistering or by
the application of Corrigan's button. When such treatment fails the
nerve may be stretched, or, in the case of a purely sensory trunk, a
portion may be excised. Local causes, such as involvement of the nerve
in a scar or in adhesions, may afford indications for operative
treatment.

#Multiple Peripheral Neuritis.#--Although this disease mainly comes
under the cognizance of the physician, it may be attended with phenomena
which call for surgical interference. In this country it is commonly due
to alcoholism, but it may result from diabetes or from chronic poisoning
with lead or arsenic, or from bacterial infections and intoxications
such as occur in diphtheria, gonorrhoea, syphilis, leprosy, typhoid,
influenza, beri-beri, and many other diseases.

It is, as a rule, widely distributed throughout the peripheral nerves,
but the distribution frequently varies with the cause--the alcoholic
form, for example, mainly affecting the legs, the diphtheritic form the
soft palate and pharynx, and that associated with lead poisoning the
forearms. The essential lesion is a degeneration of the conducting
fibres of the affected nerves, and the prominent symptoms are the result
of this. In alcoholic neuritis there is great tenderness of the muscles.
When the legs are affected the patient may be unable to walk, and the
toes may droop and the heel be drawn up, resulting in one variety of pes
equino-varus. Pressure sores and perforating ulcer of the foot are the
most important trophic phenomena.

Apart from the medical _treatment_, measures must be taken to prevent
deformity, especially when the legs are affected. The bedclothes are
supported by a cage, and the foot maintained at right angles to the leg
by sand-bags or splints. When the disease is subsiding, the nutrition of
the damaged nerves and muscles should be maintained by massage, baths,
passive movements, and the use of the galvanic current. When deformity
has been allowed to take place, operative measures may be required for
its correction.


NEUROMA[5]

[5] We have followed the classification adopted by Alexis Thomson in his
work _On Neuroma, and Neuro-fibromatosis_ (Edinburgh: 1900).

Neuroma is a clinical term applied to all tumours, irrespective of their
structure, which have their seat in nerves.

A tumour composed of newly formed nerve tissue is spoken of as a #true
neuroma#; when ganglionic cells are present in addition to nerve fibres,
the name _ganglionic neuroma_ is applied. These tumours are rare, and
are chiefly met with in the main cords or abdominal plexuses of the
sympathetic system of children or young adults. They are quite
insensitive, and their removal is only called for if they cause pain or
show signs of malignancy.

A #false neuroma# is an overgrowth of the sheath of a nerve. This
overgrowth may result in the formation of a circumscribed tumour, or may
take the form of a diffuse fibromatosis.

_The circumscribed or solitary tumour_ grows from the sheath of a nerve
which is otherwise healthy, and it may be innocent or malignant.

_The innocent_ form is usually fibrous or myxomatous, and is definitely
encapsulated. It may become cystic as a result of haemorrhage or of
myxomatous degeneration. It grows very slowly, is usually elliptical in
shape, and the solid form is rarely larger than a hazel-nut. The nerve
fibres may be spread out all round the tumour, or may run only on one
side of it. When subcutaneous and related to the smaller unnamed
cutaneous nerves, it is known as a _painful subcutaneous nodule_ or
_tubercle_. It is chiefly met with about the ankle, and most often in
women. It is remarkably sensitive, even gentle handling causing intense
pain, which usually radiates to the periphery of the nerve affected.
When related to a deeper, named nerve-trunk, it is known as a
_trunk-neuroma_. It is usually less sensitive than the "subcutaneous
nodule," and rarely gives rise to motor symptoms unless it involves the
nerve roots where they pass through bony canals.

A trunk-neuroma is recognised clinically by its position in the line of
a nerve, by the fact that it is movable in the transverse axis of the
nerve but not in its long axis, and by being unduly painful and
sensitive.

[Illustration: FIG. 85.--Amputation Stump of Upper Arm, showing bulbous
thickening of the ends of the nerves, embedded in scar tissue at the
apex of the stamp.]

_Treatment._--If the tumour causes suffering it should be removed,
preferably by shelling it out from the investing nerve sheath or
capsule. In the subcutaneous nodule the nerve is rarely recognisable,
and is usually sacrificed. When removal of the tumour is incomplete, a
tube of radium should be inserted into the cavity, to prevent recurrence
of the tumour in a malignant form.

_The malignant neuroma_ is a sarcoma growing from the sheath of a nerve.
It has the same characters and clinical features as the innocent
variety, only it grows more rapidly, and by destroying the nerve fibres
causes motor symptoms--jerkings followed by paralysis. The sarcoma tends
to spread along the lymph spaces in the long axis of the nerve, as well
as to implicate the surrounding tissues, and it is liable to give rise
to secondary growths. The malignant neuroma is met with chiefly in the
sciatic and other large nerves of the limbs.

The _treatment_ is conducted on the same lines as sarcoma in other
situations; the insertion of a tube of radium after removal of the
tumour diminishes the tendency to recurrence; a portion of the
nerve-trunk being sacrificed, means must be taken to bridge the gap. In
inoperable cases it may be possible to relieve pain by excising a
portion of the nerve above the tumour, or, when this is impracticable,
by resecting the posterior nerve roots and their ganglia within the
vertebral canal.

The so-called _amputation neuroma_ has already been referred to (p. 344).

_Diffuse or Generalised Neuro-Fibromatosis--Recklinghausen's
Disease._--These terms are now used to include what were formerly known
as "multiple neuromata," as well as certain other overgrowths related to
nerves. The essential lesion is an overgrowth of the endoneural
connective tissue throughout the nerves of both the cerebro-spinal and
sympathetic systems. The nerves are diffusely and unequally thickened,
so that small twigs may become enlarged to the size of the median, while
at irregular intervals along their course the connective-tissue
overgrowth is exaggerated so as to form tumour-like swellings similar to
the trunk-neuroma already described. The tumours, which vary greatly in
size and number--as many as a thousand have been counted in one
case--are enclosed in a capsule derived from the perineurium. The
fibromatosis may also affect the cranial nerves, the ganglia on the
posterior nerve roots, the nerves within the vertebral canal, and the
sympathetic nerves and ganglia, as well as the continuations of the
motor nerves within the muscles. The nerve fibres, although mechanically
displaced and dissociated by the overgrown endoneurium, undergo no
structural change except when compressed in passing through a bony
canal.

The disease probably originates before birth, although it may not make
its appearance till adolescence or even till adult life. It is sometimes
met with in several members of one family. It is recognised clinically
by the presence of multiple tumours in the course of the nerves, and
sometimes by palpable enlargement of the superficial nerve-trunks
(Fig. 86). The tumours resemble the solitary trunk-neuroma, are usually
quite insensitive, and many of them are unknown to the patient. As a
result of injury or other exciting cause, however, one or other tumour
may increase in size and become extremely sensitive; the pain is then
agonising; it is increased by handling, and interferes with sleep. In
these conditions, a malignant transformation of the fibroma into sarcoma
is to be suspected. Motor disturbances are exceptional, unless in the
case of tumours within the vertebral canal, which press on the spinal
medulla and cause paraplegia.

[Illustration: FIG. 86.--Diffuse enlargement of Nerves in generalised
Neuro-fibromatosis.

(After R. W. Smith.)]

Neuro-fibromatosis is frequently accompanied by _pigmentation of the
skin_ in the form of brown spots or patches scattered over the trunk.

The disease is often stationary for long periods. In progressive cases
the patient becomes exhausted, and usually dies of some intercurrent
affection, particularly phthisis. The treatment is restricted to
relieving symptoms and complications; removal of one of the tumours is
to be strongly deprecated.

In a considerable proportion of cases one of the multiple tumours takes
on the characters of a malignant growth ("secondary malignant neuroma,"
Garre). This malignant transformation may follow upon injury, or on an
unsuccessful attempt to remove the tumour. The features are those of a
rapidly growing sarcoma involving a nerve-trunk, with agonising pain
and muscular cramps, followed by paralysis from destruction of the
nerve fibres. The removal of the tumour is usually followed by
recurrence, so that high amputation is the only treatment to be
recommended. Metastasis to internal organs is exceptional.

[Illustration: FIG. 87.--Plexiform Neuroma of small Sciatic Nerve, from
a girl aet. 16.

(Mr. Annandale's case.)]

There are other types of neuro-fibromatosis which require brief mention.

_The plexiform neuroma_ (Fig. 87) is a fibromatosis confined to the
distribution of one or more contiguous nerves or of a plexus of nerves,
and it may occur either by itself or along with multiple tumours of the
nerve-trunks and with pigmentation of the skin. The clinical features
are those of an ill-defined swelling composed of a number of tortuous,
convoluted cords, lying in a loose areolar tissue and freely movable on
one another. It is rarely the seat of pain or tenderness. It most often
appears in the early years of life, sometimes in relation to a pigmented
or hairy mole. It is of slow growth, may remain stationary for long
periods, and has little or no tendency to become malignant. It is
usually subcutaneous, and is frequently situated on the head or neck in
the distribution of the trigeminal or superficial cervical nerves. There
is no necessity for its removal, but this may be indicated because of
disfigurement, especially on the face or scalp or because its bulk
interferes with function. When involving the ophthalmic division of the
trigeminus, for example, it may cause enlargement of the upper lid and
proptosis, with danger to the function of the globe. The results of
excision are usually satisfactory, even if the removal is not complete.

[Illustration: FIG. 88.--Multiple Neuro-fibromas of Skin (Molluscum
fibrosum, or Recklinghausen's disease).]

_The cutaneous neuro-fibroma_ or _molluscum fibrosum_ has been shown by
Recklinghausen to be a soft fibroma related to the terminal filaments of
one of the cutaneous nerves (Fig. 88). The disease appears in the form
of multiple, soft, projecting tumours, scattered all over the body,
except the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. The tumours are of
all sizes, some being no larger than a pin's head, whilst many are as
big as a filbert and a few even larger. Many are sessile and others are
distinctly pedunculated, but all are covered with skin. They are mobile,
soft to the touch, and of the consistence of firm fat. In exceptional
cases one of the skin tumours may attain an enormous size and cause a
hideous deformity, hanging down by its own weight in lobulated or folded
masses (pachy-dermatocele). The treatment consists in removing the
larger swellings. In some cases molluscum fibrosum is associated with
pigmentation of the skin and with multiple tumours of the nerve-trunks.
The small multiple tumours rarely call for interference.

[Illustration: FIG. 89.--Elephantiasis Neuromatosa in a woman aet. 28]

_Elephantiasis neuromatosa_ is the name applied by Virchow to a
condition in which a limb is swollen and misshapen as a result of the
extension of a neuro-fibromatosis to the skin and subcutaneous cellular
tissue of the extremity as a whole (Fig. 89). It usually begins in early
life without apparent cause, and it may be associated with multiple
tumours of the nerve-trunks. The inconvenience caused by the bulk and
weight of the limb may justify its removal.


SURGERY OF THE INDIVIDUAL NERVES[6]

[6] We desire here to acknowledge our indebtedness to Mr. James
Sherren's work on _Injuries of Nerves and their Treatment_.

#The Brachial Plexus.#--Lesions of the brachial plexus may be divided
into those above the clavicle and those below that bone.

In the #supra-clavicular injuries#, the violence applied to the head or
shoulder causes over-stretching of the anterior branches (primary
divisions) of the cervical nerves, the fifth, or the fifth and sixth
being those most liable to suffer. Sometimes the traction is exerted
upon the plexus from below, as when a man in falling from a height
endeavours to save himself by clutching at some projection, and the
lesion then mainly affects the first dorsal nerve. There is tearing of
the nerve sheaths, with haemorrhage, but in severe cases partial or
complete severance of nerve fibres may occur and these give way at
different levels. During the healing process an excess of fibrous tissue
is formed, which may interfere with regeneration.

_Post-anaesthetic paralysis_ occurs in patients in whom, during the
course of an operation, the arm is abducted and rotated laterally or
extended above the head, causing over-stretching of the plexus,
especially of the fifth, or fifth and sixth, anterior branches.

A _cervical rib_ may damage the plexus by direct pressure, the part
usually affected being the medial cord, which is made up of fibres from
the eighth cervical and first dorsal nerves.

When a lesion of the plexus complicates a _fracture of the clavicle_,
the nerve injury is due, not to pressure on or laceration of the nerves
by fragments of bone, but to the violence causing the fracture, and this
is usually applied to the point of the shoulder.

Penetrating _wounds_, apart from those met with in military practice,
are rare.

In the #infra-clavicular injuries#, the lesion most often results from
the pressure of the dislocated head of the humerus; occasionally from
attempts made to reduce the dislocation by the heel-in-the-axilla
method, or from fracture of the upper end of the humerus or of the neck
of the scapula. The whole plexus may suffer, but more frequently the
medial cord is alone implicated.

_Clinical Features._--Three types of lesion result from indirect
violence: the whole plexus; the upper-arm type; and the lower-arm type.

_When the whole plexus is involved_, sensibility is lost over the entire
forearm and hand and over the lateral surface of the arm in its distal
two-thirds. All the muscles of the arm, forearm, and hand are paralysed,
and, as a rule, also the pectorals and spinati, but the rhomboids and
serratus anterior escape. There is paralysis of the sympathetic fibres
to the eye and orbit, with narrowing of the palpebral fissure, recession
of the globe, and the pupil is slow to dilate when shaded from the
light.

The _upper-arm type_--Erb-Duchenne paralysis--is that most frequently
met with, and it is due to a lesion of the fifth anterior branch, or, it
may be, also of the sixth. The position of the upper limb is typical:
the arm and forearm hang close to the side, with the forearm extended
and pronated; the deltoid, spinati, biceps, brachialis, and supinators
are paralysed, and in some cases the radial extensors of the wrist and
the pronator teres are also affected. The patient is unable to supinate
the forearm or to abduct the arm, and in most cases to flex the forearm.
He may, however, regain some power of flexing the forearm when it is
fully pronated, the extensors of the wrist becoming feeble flexors of
the elbow. There is, as a rule, no loss of sensibility, but complaint
may be made of tickling and of pins-and-needles over the lateral aspect
of the arm. The abnormal position of the limb may persist although the
muscles regain the power of voluntary movement, and as the condition
frequently follows a fall on the shoulder, great care is necessary in
diagnosis, as the condition is apt to be attributed to an injury to the
axillary (circumflex) nerve.

The _lower-arm type_ of paralysis, associated with the name of Klumpke,
is usually due to over-stretching of the plexus, and especially affects
the anterior branch of the first dorsal nerve. In typical cases all the
intrinsic muscles of the hand are affected, and the hand assumes the
claw shape. Sensibility is usually altered over the medial side of the
arm and forearm, and there is paralysis of the sympathetic.

_Infra-clavicular injuries_, as already stated, are most often produced
by a sub-coracoid dislocation of the humerus; the medial cord is that
most frequently injured, and the muscles paralysed are those supplied by
the ulnar nerve, with, in addition, those intrinsic muscles of the hand
supplied by the median. Sensibility is affected over the medial surface
of the forearm and ulnar area of the hand. Injury of the lateral and
posterior cords is very rare.

_Treatment_ is carried out on the lines already laid down for nerve
injuries in general. It is impossible to diagnose between complete and
incomplete rupture of the nerve cords, until sufficient time has elapsed
to allow of the establishment of the reaction of degeneration. If this
is present at the end of fourteen days, operation should not be delayed.
Access to the cords of the plexus is obtained by a dissection similar to
that employed for the subclavian artery, and the nerves are sought for
as they emerge from under cover of the scalenus anterior, and are then
traced until the seat of injury is found. In the case of the first
dorsal nerve, it may be necessary temporarily to resect the clavicle.
The usual after-treatment must be persisted in until recovery ensues,
and care must be taken that the paralysed muscles do not become
over-stretched. The prognosis is less favourable in the supra-clavicular
lesions than in those below the clavicle, which nearly always recover
without surgical intervention.

In the _brachial birth-paralysis_ met with in infants, the lesion is due
to over-stretching of the plexus, and is nearly always of the
Erb-Duchenne type. The injury is usually unilateral, it occurs with
almost equal frequency in breech and in vertex presentations, and the
left arm is more often affected than the right. The lesion is seldom
recognised at birth. The first symptom noticed is tenderness in the
supra-clavicular region, the child crying when this part is touched or
the arm is moved. The attitude may be that of the Erb-Duchenne type, or
the whole of the muscles of the upper limb may be flaccid, and the arm
hangs powerless. A considerable proportion of the cases recover
spontaneously. The arm is to be kept at rest, with the affected muscles
relaxed, and, as soon as tenderness has disappeared, daily massage and
passive movements are employed. The reaction of degeneration can rarely
be satisfactorily tested before the child is three months old, but if it
is present, an operation should be performed. After operation, the
shoulder should be elevated so that no traction is exerted on the
affected cords.

#The long thoracic nerve# (nerve of Bell), which supplies the serratus
anterior, is rarely injured. In those whose occupation entails carrying
weights upon the shoulder it may be contused, and the resulting
paralysis of the serratus is usually combined with paralysis of the
lower part of the trapezius, the branches from the third and fourth
cervical nerves which supply this muscle also being exposed to pressure
as they pass across the root of the neck. There is complaint of pain
above the clavicle, and winging of the scapula; the patient is unable to
raise the arm in front of the body above the level of the shoulder or to
perform any forward pushing movements; on attempting either of these the
winging of the scapula is at once increased. If the scapula is compared
with that on the sound side, it is seen that, in addition to the lower
angle being more prominent, the spine is more horizontal and the lower
angle nearer the middle line. The majority of these cases recover if the
limb is placed at absolute rest, the elbow supported, and massage and
galvanism persevered with. If the paralysis persists, the sterno-costal
portion of the pectoralis major may be transplanted to the lower angle
of the scapula.

The long thoracic nerve may be cut across while clearing out the axilla
in operating for cancer of the breast. The displacement of the scapula
is not so marked as in the preceding type, and the patient is able to
perform pushing movements below the level of the shoulder. If the
reaction of degeneration develops, an operation may be performed, the
ends of the nerve being sutured, or the distal end grafted into the
posterior cord of the brachial plexus.

#The Axillary (Circumflex) Nerve.#--In the majority of cases in which
paralysis of the deltoid follows upon an injury of the shoulder, it is
due to a lesion of the fifth cervical nerve, as has already been
described in injuries of the brachial plexus. The axillary nerve itself
as it passes round the neck of the humerus is most liable to be injured
from the pressure of a crutch, or of the head of the humerus in
sub-glenoid dislocation, or in fracture of the neck of the scapula or of
the humerus. In miners, who work for long periods lying on the side, the
muscle may be paralysed by direct pressure on the terminal filaments of
the nerve, and the nerve may also be involved as a result of disease in
the sub-deltoid bursa.

The deltoid is wasted, and the acromion unduly prominent. In recent
cases paralysis of the muscle is easily detected. In cases of long
standing it is not so simple, because other muscles, the spinati, the
clavicular fibres of the pectoral and the serratus, take its place and
elevate the arm; there is always loss of sensation on the lateral aspect
of the shoulder. There is rarely any call for operative treatment, as
the paralysis is usually compensated for by other muscles.

When the _supra-scapular nerve_ is contused or stretched in injuries of
the shoulder, the spinati muscles are paralysed and wasted, the spine of
the scapula is unduly prominent, and there is impairment in the power of
abducting the arm and rotating it laterally.

The _musculo-cutaneous nerve_ is very rarely injured; when cut across,
there is paralysis of the coraco-brachialis, biceps, and part of the
brachialis, but no movements are abolished, the forearm being flexed, in
the pronated position, by the brachio-radialis and long radial extensor
of the wrist; in the supinated position, by that portion of the
brachialis supplied by the radial nerve. Supination is feebly performed
by the supinator muscle. Protopathic and epicritic sensibility are lost
over the radial side of the forearm.

#Radial (Musculo-Spiral) Nerve.#--From its anatomical relationships this
trunk is more exposed to injury than any other nerve in the body. It is
frequently compressed against the humerus in sleeping with the arm
resting on the back of a chair, especially in the deep sleep of
alcoholic intoxication (drunkard's palsy). It may be pressed upon by a
crutch in the axilla, by the dislocated head of the humerus, or by
violent compression of the arm, as when an elastic tourniquet is applied
too tightly. The most serious and permanent injuries of this nerve are
associated with fractures of the humerus, especially those from direct
violence attended with comminution of the bone. The nerve may be crushed
or torn by one of the fragments at the time of the injury, or at a later
period may be compressed by callus.

_Clinical Features._--Immediately after the injury it is impossible to
tell whether the nerve is torn across or merely compressed. The patient
may complain of numbness and tingling in the distribution of the
superficial branch of the nerve, but it is a striking fact, that so long
as the nerve is divided below the level at which it gives off the dorsal
cutaneous nerve of the forearm (external cutaneous branch), there is no
loss of sensation. When it is divided above the origin of the dorsal
cutaneous branch, or when the dorsal branch of the musculo-cutaneous
nerve is also divided, there is a loss of sensibility on the dorsum
of the hand.

The motor symptoms predominate, the muscles affected being the extensors
of the wrist and fingers, and the supinators. There is a characteristic
"drop-wrist"; the wrist is flexed and pronated, and the patient is
unable to dorsiflex the wrist or fingers (Fig. 90). If the hand and
proximal phalanges are supported, the second and third phalanges may be
partly extended by the interossei and lumbricals. There is also
considerable impairment of power in the muscles which antagonise those
that are paralysed, so that the grasp of the hand is feeble, and the
patient almost loses the use of it; in some cases this would appear to
be due to the median nerve having been injured at the same time.

[Illustration: FIG. 90.--Drop-wrist following Fracture of Shaft of
Humerus.]

If the lesion is high up, as it is, for example, in crutch paralysis,
the triceps and anconeus may also suffer.

_Treatment._--The slighter forms of injury by compression recover under
massage, douching, and electricity. If there is drop-wrist, the hand and
forearm are placed on a palmar splint, with the hand dorsiflexed to
nearly a right angle, and this position is maintained until voluntary
dorsiflexion at the wrist returns to the normal. Recovery is sometimes
delayed for several months.

In the more severe injuries associated with fracture of the humerus and
attended with the reaction of degeneration, it is necessary to cut down
upon the nerve and free it from the pressure of a fragment of bone or
from callus or adhesions. If the nerve is torn across, the ends must be
sutured, and if this is impossible owing to loss of tissue, the gap may
be bridged by a graft taken from the superficial branch of the radial
nerve, or the ends may be implanted into the median.

Finally, in cases in which the paralysis is permanent and incurable, the
disability may be relieved by operation. A fascial graft can be employed
to act as a ligament permanently extending the wrist; it is attached to
the third and fourth metacarpal bones distally and to the radius or ulna
proximally. The flexor carpi radialis can then be joined up with the
extensor digitorum communis by passing its tendon through an aperture in
the interosseous membrane, or better still, through the pronator
quadratus, as there is less likelihood of the formation of adhesions
when the tendon passes through muscle than through interosseous
membrane. The palmaris longus is anastomosed with the abductor pollicis
longus (extensor ossis metacarpi pollicis), thus securing a fair amount
of abduction of the thumb. The flexor carpi ulnaris may also be
anastomosed with the common extensor of the fingers. The extensors of
the wrist may be shortened, so as to place the hand in the position of
dorsal flexion, and thus improve the attitude and grasp of the hand.

_The superficial branch of the radial_ (radial nerve) _and the deep
branch_ (posterior interosseous), apart from suffering in lesions of the
radial, are liable to be contused or torn is dislocation of the head of
the radius, and in fracture of the neck of the bone. The deep branch may
be divided as it passes through the supinator in operations on old
fractures and dislocations in the region of the elbow. Division of the
superficial branch in the upper two-thirds of the forearm produces no
loss of sensibility; division in the lower third after the nerve has
become associated with branches from the musculo-cutaneous is followed
by a loss of sensibility on the radial side of the hand and thumb. Wounds
on the dorsal surface of the wrist and forearm are often followed by
loss of sensibility over a larger area, because the musculo-cutaneous
nerve is divided as well, and some of the fibres of the lower lateral
cutaneous branch of the radial.

[Illustration: FIG. 91.--To illustrate the Loss of Sensation produced by
Division of the Median Nerve. The area of complete cutaneous
insensibility is shaded black. The parts insensitive to light touch and
to intermediate degrees of temperature are enclosed within the dotted
line.

(After Head and Sherren.)]

#The Median Nerve# is most frequently injured in wounds made by broken
glass in the region of the wrist. It may also be injured in fractures of
the lower end of the humerus, in fractures of both bones of the forearm,
and as a result of pressure by splints. After _division at the elbow_,
there is impairment of mobility which affects the thumb, and to a less
extent the index finger: the terminal phalanx of the thumb cannot be
flexed owing to the paralysis of the flexor pollicis longus, and the
index can only be flexed at its metacarpo-phalangeal joint by the
interosseous muscles attached to it. Pronation of the forearm is feeble,
and is completed by the weight of the hand. After _division at the
wrist_, the abductor-opponens group of muscles and the two lateral
lumbricals only are affected; the abduction of the thumb can be feebly
imitated by the short extensor and the long abductor (ext. ossis
metacarpi pollicis), while opposition may be simulated by contraction of
the long flexor and the short abductor of the thumb; the paralysis of
the two medial lumbricals produces no symptoms that can be recognised.
It is important to remember that when the median nerve is divided at the
wrist, deep touch can be appreciated over the whole of the area
supplied by the nerve; the injury, therefore, is liable to be over
looked. If, however, the tendons are divided as well as the nerve, there
is insensibility to deep touch. The areas of epicritic and of
protopathic insensibility are illustrated in Fig. 91. The division of
the nerve at the elbow, or even at the axilla, does not increase the
extent of the loss of epicritic or protopathic sensibility, but usually
affects deep sensibility.

[Illustration: FIG. 92.--To illustrate Loss of Sensation produced by
complete Division of Ulnar Nerve. Loss of all forms of cutaneous
sensibility is represented by the shaded area. The parts insensitive to
light touch and to intermediate degrees of heat and cold are enclosed
within the dotted line.

(Head and Sherren.)]

#The Ulnar Nerve.#--The most common injury of this nerve is its division
in transverse accidental wounds just above the wrist. In the arm it may
be contused, along with the radial, in crutch paralysis; in the region
of the elbow it may be injured in fractures or dislocations, or it may
be accidentally divided in the operation for excising the elbow-joint.

When it is injured _at or above the elbow_, there is paralysis of the
flexor carpi ulnaris, the ulnar half of the flexor digitorum profundus,
all the interossei, the two medial lumbricals, and the adductors of the
thumb. The hand assumes a characteristic attitude: the index and middle
fingers are extended at the metacarpo-phalangeal joints owing to
paralysis of the interosseous muscles attached to them; the little and
ring fingers are hyper-extended at these joints in consequence of the
paralysis of the lumbricals; all the fingers are flexed at the
inter-phalangeal joints, the flexion being most marked in the little and
ring fingers--claw-hand or _main en griffe_. On flexing the wrist, the
hand is tilted to the radial side, but the paralysis of the flexor carpi
ulnaris is often compensated for by the action of the palmaris longus.
The little and ring fingers can be flexed to a slight degree by the
slips of the flexor sublimis attached to them and supplied by the median
nerve; flexion of the terminal phalanx of the little finger is almost
impossible. Adduction and abduction movements of the fingers are lost.
Adduction of the thumb is carried out, not by the paralysed adductor
pollicis, but the movement may be simulated by the long flexor and
extensor muscles of the thumb. Epicritic sensibility is lost over the
little finger, the ulnar half of the ring finger, and that part of the
palm and dorsum of the hand to the ulnar side of a line drawn
longitudinally through the ring finger and continued upwards.
Protopathic sensibility is lost over an area which varies in different
cases. Deep sensibility is usually lost over an area almost as extensive
as that of protopathic insensibility.

When the nerve is _divided at the wrist_, the adjacent tendons are also
frequently severed. If divided below the point at which its dorsal
branch is given off, the sensory paralysis is much less marked, and the
injury is therefore liable to be overlooked until the wasting of muscles
and typical _main en griffe_ ensue. The loss of sensibility after
division of the nerve before the dorsal branch is given off resembles
that after division at the elbow, except that in uncomplicated cases
deep sensibility is usually retained. If the tendons are divided as
well, however, deep touch is also lost.

Care must be taken in all these injuries to prevent deformity; a splint
must be worn, at least during the night, until the muscles regain their
power of voluntary movement, and then exercises should be instituted.

#Dislocation of the ulnar nerve# at the elbow results from sudden and
violent flexion of the joint, the muscular effort causing stretching or
laceration of the fascia that holds the nerve in its groove; it is
predisposed to if the groove is shallow as a result of imperfect
development of the medial condyle of the humerus, and by cubitus valgus.

The nerve slips forward, and may be felt lying on the medial aspect of
the condyle. It may retain this position, or it may slip backwards and
forwards with the movements of the arm. The symptoms at the time of the
displacement are some disability at the elbow, and pain and tingling
along the nerve, which are exaggerated by movement and by pressure. The
symptoms may subside altogether, or a neuritis may develop, with severe
pain shooting up the nerve.

The dislocated nerve is easily replaced, but is difficult to retain in
position. In recent cases the arm may be placed in the extended position
with a pad over the condyle, care being taken to avoid pressure on the
nerve. Failing relief, it is better to make a bed for the nerve by
dividing the deep fascia behind the medial condyle and to stitch the
edges of the fascia over the nerve. This operation has been successful
in all the recorded cases.

#The Sciatic Nerve.#--When this nerve is compressed, as by sitting on a
fence, there is tingling and powerlessness in the limb as a whole, known
as "sleeping" of the limb, but these phenomena are evanescent. _Injuries
to the great sciatic nerve_ are rare except in war. Partial division is
more common than complete, and it is noteworthy that the fibres destined
for the peroneal nerve are more often and more severely injured than
those for the tibial (internal popliteal). After complete division, all
the muscles of the leg are paralysed; if the section is in the upper
part of the thigh, the hamstrings are also paralysed. The limb is at
first quite powerless, but the patient usually recovers sufficiently to
be able to walk with a little support, and although the hamstrings are
paralysed the knee can be flexed by the sartorius and gracilis. The
chief feature is drop-foot. There is also loss of sensation below the
knee except along the course of the long saphenous nerve on the medial
side of the leg and foot. Sensibility to deep touch is only lost over a
comparatively small area on the dorsum of the foot.

#The Common Peroneal (external popliteal) nerve# is exposed to injury
where it winds round the neck of the fibula, because it is superficial
and lies against the unyielding bone. It may be compressed by a
tourniquet, or it may be bruised or torn in fractures of the upper end
of the bone. It has been divided in accidental wounds,--by a scythe, for
example,--in incising for cellulitis, and in performing subcutaneous
tenotomy of the biceps tendon. Cases have been observed of paralysis of
the nerve as a result of prolonged acute flexion of the knee in certain
occupations.

When the nerve is divided, the most obvious result is "drop-foot"; the
patient is unable to dorsiflex the foot and cannot lift his toes off the
ground, so that in walking he is obliged to jerk the foot forwards and
laterally. The loss of sensibility depends upon whether the nerve is
divided above or below the origin of the large cutaneous branch which
comes off just before it passes round the neck of the fibula. In course
of time the foot becomes inverted and the toes are pointed--pes
equino-varus--and trophic sores are liable to form.

#The Tibial (internal popliteal) nerve# is rarely injured.

#The Cranial nerves# are considered with affections of the head and neck
(Vol. II.).


NEURALGIA

The term neuralgia is applied clinically to any pain which follows the
course of a nerve, and is not referable to any discoverable cause. It
should not be applied to pain which results from pressure on a nerve by
a tumour, a mass of callus, an aneurysm, or by any similar gross lesion.
We shall only consider here those forms of neuralgia which are amenable
to surgical treatment.

#Brachial Neuralgia.#--The pain is definitely located in the
distribution of one of the branches or nerve roots, is often
intermittent, and is usually associated with tingling and disturbance of
tactile sensation. The root of the neck should be examined to exclude
pressure as the cause of the pain by a cervical rib, a tumour, or an
aneurysm. When medical treatment fails, the nerve-trunks may be injected
with saline solution or recourse may be had to operative measures, the
affected cords being exposed and stretched through an incision in the
posterior triangle of the neck. If this fails to give relief, the more
serious operation of resecting the posterior roots of the affected
nerves within the vertebral canal may be considered.

_Neuralgia of the sciatic nerve_--#sciatica#--is the most common form of
neuralgia met with in surgical practice.

It is chiefly met with in adults of gouty or rheumatic tendencies who
suffer from indigestion, constipation, and oxaluria--in fact, the same
type of patients who are liable to lumbago, and the two affections are
frequently associated. In hospital practice it is commonly met with in
coal-miners and others who assume a squatting position at work. The
onset of the pain may follow over-exertion and exposure to cold and wet,
especially in those who do not take regular exercise. Any error of diet
or indulgence in beer or wine may contribute to its development.

The essential symptom is paroxysmal or continuous pain along the course
of the nerve in the buttock, thigh, or leg. It may be comparatively
slight, or it may be so severe as to prevent sleep. It is aggravated by
movement, so that the patient walks lame or is obliged to lie up. It is
aggravated also by any movement which tends to put the nerve on the
stretch, as in bending down to put on the shoes, such movements also
causing tingling down the nerve, and sometimes numbness in the foot.
This may be demonstrated by flexing the thigh on the abdomen, the knee
being kept extended; there is no pain if the same manoeuvre is repeated
with the knee flexed. The nerve is sensitive to pressure, the most
tender points being its emergence from the greater sciatic foramen, the
hollow between the trochanter and the ischial tuberosity, and where the
common peroneal nerve winds round the neck of the fibula. The muscles of
the thigh are often wasted and are liable to twitch.

The clinical features vary a good deal in different cases; the affection
is often obstinate, and may last for many weeks or even months.

In the sciatica that results from neuritis and perineuritis, there is
marked tenderness on pressure due to the involvement of the nerve
filaments in the sheath of the nerve, and there may be patches of
cutaneous anaesthesia, loss of tendon reflexes, localised wasting of
muscles, and vaso-motor and trophic changes. The presence of the
reaction of degeneration confirms the diagnosis of neuritis. In
long-standing cases the pain and discomfort may lead to a postural
scoliosis (_ischias-scoliotica_).

_Diagnosis._--Pain referred along the course of the sciatic nerve on one
side, or, as is sometimes the case, on both sides, is a symptom of
tumours of the uterus, the rectum, or the pelvic bones. It may result
also from the pressure of an abscess or an aneurysm either inside the
pelvis or in the buttock, and is sometimes associated with disease of
the spinal medulla, such as tabes. Gluteal fibrositis may be mistaken
for sciatica. It is also necessary to exclude such conditions as disease
in the hip or sacro-iliac joint, especially tuberculous disease and
arthritis deformans, before arriving at a diagnosis of sciatica. A
digital examination of the rectum or vagina is of great value in
excluding intra-pelvic tumours.

_Treatment_ is both general and local. Any constitutional tendency, such
as gout or rheumatism, must be counteracted, and indigestion, oxaluria,
and constipation should receive appropriate treatment. In acute cases
the patient is confined to bed between blankets, the limb is wrapped in
thermogene wool, and the knee is flexed over a pillow; in some cases
relief is experienced from the use of a long splint, or slinging the leg
in a Salter's cradle. A rubber hot-bottle may be applied over the seat
of greatest pain. The bowels should be well opened by castor oil or by
calomel followed by a saline. Salicylate of soda in full doses, or
aspirin, usually proves effectual in relieving pain, but when this is
very intense it may call for injections of heroin or morphin. Potassium
iodide is of benefit in chronic cases.

Relief usually results from bathing, douching, and massage, and from
repeated gentle stretching of the nerve. This may be carried out by
passive movements of the limb--the hip being flexed while the knee is
kept extended; and by active movements--the patient flexing the limb at
the hip, the knee being maintained in the extended position. These
exercises, which may be preceded by massage, are carried out night and
morning, and should be practised systematically by those who are liable
to sciatica.

Benefit has followed the injection into the nerve itself, or into the
tissues surrounding it, of normal saline solution; from 70-100 c.c. are
injected at one time. If the pain recurs, the injection may require to
be repeated on many occasions at different points up and down the nerve.
Needling or acupuncture consists in piercing the nerve at intervals in
the buttock and thigh with long steel needles. Six or eight needles are
inserted and left in position for from fifteen to thirty minutes.

In obstinate and severe cases the nerve may be _forcibly stretched_.
This may be done bloodlessly by placing the patient on his back with the
hip flexed to a right angle, and then gradually extending the knee until
it is in a straight line with the thigh (Billroth). A general anaesthetic
is usually required. A more effectual method is to expose the nerve
through an incision at the fold of the buttock, and forcibly pull upon
it. This operation is most successful when the pain is due to the nerve
being involved in adhesions.

#Trigeminal Neuralgia.#--A severe form of epileptiform neuralgia occurs
in the branches of the fifth nerve, and is one of the most painful
affections to which human flesh is liable. So far as its pathology is
known, it is believed to be due to degenerative changes in the semilunar
(Gasserian) ganglion. It is met with in adults, is almost invariably
unilateral, and develops without apparent cause. The pain, which occurs
in paroxysms, is at first of moderate severity, but gradually becomes
agonising. In the early stages the paroxysms occur at wide intervals,
but later they recur with such frequency as to be almost continuous.
They are usually excited by some trivial cause, such as moving the jaws
in eating or speaking, touching the face as in washing, or exposure to a
draught of cold air. Between the paroxysms the patient is free from
pain, but is in constant terror of its return, and the face wears an
expression of extreme suffering and anxiety. When the paroxysm is
accompanied by twitching of the facial muscles, it is called _spasmodic
tic_.

The skin of the affected area may be glazed and red, or may be pale and
moist with inspissated sweat, the patient not daring to touch or wash
it.

There is excessive tenderness at the points of emergence of the
different branches on the face, and pressure over one or other of these
points may excite a paroxysm. In typical cases the patient is unable to
take any active part in life. The attempt to eat is attended with such
severe pain that he avoids taking food. In some cases the suffering is
so great that the patient only obtains sleep by the use of hypnotics,
and he is often on the verge of suicide.

_Diagnosis._--There is seldom any difficulty in recognising the disease.
It is important, however, to exclude the hysterical form of neuralgia,
which is characterised by its occurrence earlier in life, by the pain
varying in situation, being frequently bilateral, and being more often
constant than paroxysmal.

_Treatment._--Before having recourse to the measures described below, it
is advisable to give a thorough trial to the medical measures used in
the treatment of neuralgia.

_The Injection of Alcohol into the Nerve._--The alcohol acts by
destroying the nerve fibres, and must be brought into direct contact
with them; if the nerve has been properly struck the injection is
followed by complete anaesthesia in the distribution of the nerve. The
relief may last for from six months to three years; if the pain returns,
the injection may be repeated. The strength of the alcohol should be 85
per cent., and the amount injected about 2 c.c.; a general, or
preferably a local, anaesthetic (novocain) should be employed
(Schlosser); the needle is 8 cm. long, and 0.7 mm. in diameter. The
severe pain which the alcohol causes may be lessened, after the needle
has penetrated to the necessary depth, by passing a few cubic
centimetres of a 2 per cent. solution of _novocain-suprarenin_ through
it before the alcohol is injected. The treatment by injection of alcohol
is superior to the resection of branches of the nerve, for though
relapses occur after the treatment with alcohol, renewed freedom from
pain may be obtained by its repetition. The ophthalmic division should
not, however, be treated in this manner, for the alcohol may escape into
the orbit and endanger other nerves in this region. Harris recommends
the injection of alcohol into the semilunar ganglion.

_Operative Treatment._--This consists in the removal of the affected
nerve or nerves, either by resection--_neurectomy_; or by a combination
of resection with twisting or tearing of the nerve from its central
connections--_avulsion_. To prevent the regeneration of the nerve after
these operations, the canal of exit through the bone should be
obliterated; this is best accomplished by a silver screw-nail driven
home by an ordinary screw-driver (Charles H. Mayo).

When the neuralgia involves branches of two or of all three trunks, or
when it has recurred after temporary relief following resection of
individual branches, the _removal of the semilunar ganglion_, along with
the main trunks of the maxillary and mandibular divisions, should be
considered.

The operation is a difficult and serious one, but the results are
satisfactory so far as the cure of the neuralgia is concerned. There is
little or no disability from the unilateral paralysis of the muscles of
mastication; but on account of the insensitiveness of the cornea, the
eye must be protected from irritation, especially during the first month
or two after the operation; this may be done by fixing a large
watch-glass around the edge of the orbit with adhesive plaster.

If the ophthalmic branch is not involved, neither it nor the ganglion
should be interfered with; the maxillary and mandibular divisions should
be divided within the skull, and the foramen rotundum and foramen ovale
obliterated.




CHAPTER XVII

THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE


Structure of skin--_Blisters_--_Callosities_--_Corns_--_Chilblains_
    --_Boils_--_Carbuncle_--_Abscess_--_Veldt sores_--Tuberculosis of
    skin: _Inoculation tubercle_--_Lupus_: _Varieties_--Sporotrichosis
    --Elephantiasis--Sebaceous cysts or wens--Moles--Horns--New growths:
    _Fibroma_; _Papilloma_; _Adenoma_; _Epithelioma_; _Rodent cancer_;
    _Melanotic cancer_; _Sarcoma_--AFFECTIONS OF CICATRICES--_Varieties
    of scars_--_Keloid_--_Tumours_--AFFECTIONS OF NAILS.

#Structure of Skin.#--The skin is composed of a superficial cellular
layer--the epidermis, and the corium or true skin. The _epidermis_ is
differentiated from without inwards into the stratum corneum, the
stratum lucidum, the stratum granulosum, and the rete Malpighii or
germinal layer, from which all the others are developed. The _corium_ or
_true skin_ consists of connective tissue, in which ramify the blood
vessels, lymphatics, and nerves. That part of the corium immediately
adjoining the epidermis is known as the papillary portion, and contains
the terminal loops of the cutaneous blood vessels and the terminations
of the cutaneous nerves. The deeper portion of the true skin is known as
the reticular portion, and is largely composed of adipose tissue.

#Blisters# result from the exudation of serous fluid beneath the horny
layer of the epidermis. The fluid may be clear, as in the blisters of a
recent burn, or blood-stained, as in the blisters commonly accompanying
fractures of the leg. It may become purulent as a result of infection,
and this may be the starting-point of lymphangitis or cellulitis.

The skin should be disinfected and the blisters punctured. When
infected, the separated horny layer must be cut away with scissors to
allow of the necessary purification.

#Callosities# are prominent, indurated masses of the horny layer of the
epidermis, where it has been exposed to prolonged friction and pressure.
They occur on the fingers and hand as a result of certain occupations
and sports, but are most common under the balls of the toes or heel. A
bursa may form beneath a callosity, and if it becomes inflamed may cause
considerable suffering; if suppuration ensues, a sinus may form,
resembling a perforating ulcer of the foot.

The _treatment_ of callosities on the foot consists in removing pressure
by wearing properly fitting boots, and in applying a ring pad around the
callosity; another method is to fit a sock of spongiopilene with a hole
cut out opposite the callosity. After soaking in hot water, the
overgrown horny layer is pared away, and the part painted daily with a
saturated solution of salicylic acid in flexile collodion.

[Illustration: FIG. 93.--Callosities and Corns on the Sole and Plantar
Aspect of the Toes in a woman who was also the subject of flat-foot.]

#Corns.#--A corn is a localised overgrowth of the horny layer of the
epidermis, which grows downwards, pressing upon and displacing the
sensitive papillae of the corium. Corns are due to the friction and
pressure of ill-fitting boots, and are met with chiefly on the toes and
sole of the foot. A corn is usually hard, dry, and white; but it may be
sodden from moisture, as in "soft corns" between the toes. A bursa may
form beneath a corn, and if inflamed constitutes one form of bunion.
When suppuration takes place in relation to a corn, there is great pain
and disability, and it may prove the starting-point of lymphangitis.

The _treatment_ consists in the wearing of properly fitting boots and
stockings, and, if the symptoms persist, the corn should be removed.
This is done after the manner of chiropodists by digging out the corn
with a suitably shaped knife. A more radical procedure is to excise,
under local anaesthesia, the portion of skin containing the corn and
the underlying bursa. The majority of so-called corn solvents consist of
a solution of salicylic acid in collodion; if this is painted on daily,
the epidermis dies and can then be pared away. The unskilful paring of
corns may determine the occurrence of senile gangrene in those who are
predisposed to it by disease of the arteries.

[Illustration: FIG. 94.--Ulcerated Chilblains on Fingers of a Child.]

#Chilblains.#--Chilblain or _erythema pernio_ is a vascular disturbance
resulting from the alternate action of cold and heat on the distal parts
of the body. Chilblains are met with chiefly on the fingers and toes in
children and anaemic girls. In the mild form there is a sensation of
burning and itching, the part becomes swollen, of a dusky red colour,
and the skin is tense and shiny. In more severe cases the burning and
itching are attended with pain, and the skin becomes of a violet or
wine-red colour. There is a third degree, closely approaching
frost-bite, in which the skin tends to blister and give way, leaving an
indolent raw surface popularly known as a "broken chilblain."

Those liable to chilblains should take open-air exercise, nourishing
food, cod-liver oil, and tonics. Woollen stockings and gloves should be
worn in cold weather, and sudden changes of temperature avoided. The
symptoms may be relieved by ichthyol ointment, glycerin and belladonna,
or a mixture of Venice turpentine, castor oil, and collodion applied on
lint which is wrapped round the toe. Another favourite application is
one of equal parts of tincture of capsicum and compound liniment of
camphor, painted over the area night and morning. Balsam of Peru or
resin ointment spread on gauze should be applied to broken chilblains.
The most effective treatment is Bier's bandage applied for about six
hours twice daily; it can be worn while the patient is following his
occupation; in chronic cases this may be supplemented with hot-air
baths.

#Boils and Carbuncles.#--These result from infection with the
staphylococcus aureus, which enters the orifices of the ducts of the
skin under the influence of friction and pressure, as was demonstrated
by the well-known experiment of Garre, who produced a crop of pustules
and boils on his own forearm by rubbing in a culture of the
staphylococcus aureus.

A #boil# results when the infection is located in a hair follicle or
sebaceous gland. A hard, painful, conical swelling develops, to which,
so long as the skin retains its normal appearance, the term "blind
boil" is applied. Usually, however, the skin becomes red, and after a
time breaks, giving exit to a drop or two of thick pus. After an
interval of from six to ten days a soft white slough is discharged; this
is known as the "core," and consists of the necrosed hair follicle or
sebaceous gland. After the separation of the core the boil heals
rapidly, leaving a small depressed scar.

Boils are most frequently met with on the back of the neck and the
buttocks, and on other parts where the skin is coarse and thick and is
exposed to friction and pressure. The occurrence of a number or a
succession of boils is due to spread of the infection, the cocci from
the original boil obtaining access to adjacent hair follicles. The
spread of boils may be unwittingly promoted by the use of a domestic
poultice or the wearing of infected underclothing.

While boils are frequently met with in debilitated persons, and
particularly in those suffering from diabetes or Bright's disease, they
also occur in those who enjoy vigorous health. They seldom prove
dangerous to life except in diabetic subjects, but when they occur on
the face there is a risk of lymphatic and of general pyogenic infection.
Boils may be differentiated from syphilitic lesions of the skin by
their acute onset and progress, and by the absence of other evidence of
syphilis; and from the malignant or anthrax pustule by the absence of
the central black eschar and of the circumstances which attend upon
anthrax infection.

_Treatment._--The skin of the affected area should be painted with
iodine, and a Klapp's suction bell applied thrice daily. If pus forms,
the skin is frozen with ethyl-chloride and a small incision made, after
which the application of the suction bell is persevered with. The
further treatment consists in the use of diluted boracic or resin
ointment. In multiple boils on the trunk and limbs, lysol or boracic
baths are of service; the underclothing should be frequently changed,
and that which is discarded must be disinfected. In patients with
recurrence of boils about the neck, re-infection frequently takes place
from the scalp, to which therefore treatment should be directed.

Any impaired condition of health should be corrected; when, there is
sugar or albumen in the urine the conditions on which these depend must
receive appropriate treatment. When there are successive crops of boils,
recourse should be had to vaccines. In refractory cases benefit has
followed the subcutaneous injection of lipoid solution containing tin.

#Carbuncle# may be looked upon as an aggregation of boils, and is
characterised by a densely hard base and a brownish-red discoloration of
the skin. It is usually about the size of a crown-piece, but it may
continue to enlarge until it attains the size of a dinner-plate. The
patient is ill and feverish, and the pain may be so severe as to prevent
sleep. As time goes on several points of suppuration appear, and when
these burst there are formed a number of openings in the skin, giving it
a cribriform appearance; these openings exude pus. The different
openings ultimately fuse and the large adherent greyish-white slough is
exposed. The separation of the slough is a tedious process, and the
patient may become exhausted by pain, discharge, and toxin absorption.
When the slough is finally thrown off, a deep gap is left, which takes a
long time to heal. A large carbuncle is a grave disease, especially in a
weakly person suffering from diabetes or chronic alcoholism; we have on
several occasions seen diabetic coma supervene and the patient die
without recovering consciousness. In the majority of cases the patient
is laid aside for several months. It is most common in male adults over
forty years of age, and is usually situated on the back between the
shoulders. When it occurs on the face or anterior part of the neck it is
especially dangerous, because of the greater risk of dissemination of
the infection.

A carbuncle is to be differentiated from an ulcerated gumma and from
anthrax pustule.

[Illustration: FIG. 95.--Carbuncle of seventeen days' duration in a
woman aet. 57.]

_Treatment._--Pain is relieved by full doses of opium or codein, and
these drugs are specially indicated when sugar is present in the urine.
Vaccines may be given a trial. The diet should be liberal and easily
digested, and strychnin and other stimulants may be of service. Locally
the treatment is carried out on the same lines as for boils.

In some cases it is advisable to excise the carbuncle or to make
incisions across it in different directions, so that the resulting wound
presents a stellate appearance.

#Acute Abscesses of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue in Young
Children.#--In young infants, abscesses are not infrequently met with
scattered over the trunk and limbs, and are probably the result of
infection of the sebaceous glands from dirty underclothing. The
abscesses should be opened, and the further spread of infection
prevented by cleansing of the skin and by the use of clean under-linen.
Similar abscesses are met with on the scalp in association with eczema,
impetigo, and pediculosis.

#Veldt Sore.#--This sore usually originates in an abrasion of the
epidermis, such as a sun blister, the bite of an insect, or a scratch. A
pustule forms and bursts, and a brownish-yellow scab forms over it. When
this is removed, an ulcer is left which has little tendency to heal.
These sores are most common about the hands, arms, neck, and feet, and
are most apt to occur in those who have had no opportunities of washing,
and who have lived for a long time on tinned foods.

#Tuberculosis of the Skin.#--Interest attaches chiefly to the primary
forms of tuberculosis of the skin in which the bacilli penetrate from
without--inoculation tubercle and lupus.

#Inoculation Tubercle.#--The appearances vary with the conditions under
which the inoculation takes place. As observed on the fingers of adults,
the affection takes the form of an indolent painless swelling, the
epidermis being red and glazed, or warty, and irregularly fissured.
Sometimes the epidermis gives way, forming an ulcer with flabby
granulations. The infection rarely spreads to the lymphatics, but we
have seen inoculation tubercle of the index-finger followed by a large
cold abscess on the median side of the upper arm and by a huge mass of
breaking down glands in the axilla.

In children who run about barefooted in towns, tubercle may be
inoculated into wounds in the sole or about the toes, and although the
local appearances may not be characteristic, the nature of the infection
is revealed by its tendency to spread up the limb along the lymph
vessels, giving rise to abscesses and fungating ulcers in relation to
the femoral glands.

#Tuberculous Lupus.#--This is an extremely chronic affection of the
skin. It rarely extends to the lymph glands, and of all tuberculous
lesions is the least dangerous to life. The commonest form of
lupus--_lupus vulgaris_--usually commences in childhood or youth, and is
most often met with on the nose or cheek. The early and typical
appearance is that of brownish-yellow or pink nodules in the skin, about
the size of hemp seed. Healing frequently occurs in the centre of the
affected area while the disease continues to extend at the margin.

When there is actual destruction of tissue and ulceration--the so-called
"_lupus excedens_" or "_ulcerans_"--healing is attended with
cicatricial contraction, which may cause unsightly deformity. When the
cheek is affected, the lower eyelid may be drawn down and everted; when
the lips are affected, the mouth may be distorted or seriously
diminished in size. When the nose is attacked, both the skin and mucous
surfaces are usually involved, and the nasal orifices may be narrowed or
even obliterated; sometimes the soft parts, including the cartilages,
are destroyed, leaving only the bones covered by tightly stretched scar
tissue.

The disease progresses slowly, healing in some places and spreading at
others. The patient complains of a burning sensation, but little of
pain, and is chiefly concerned about the disfigurement. Nothing is more
characteristic of lupus than the appearance of fresh nodules in parts
which have already healed. In the course of years large tracts of the
face and neck may become affected. From the lips it may spread to the
gum and palate, giving to the mucous membrane the appearance of a
raised, bright-red, papillary or villous surface. When the disease
affects the gums, the teeth may become loose and fall out.

[Illustration: FIG. 96.--Tuberculous Elephantiasis in a woman aet. 35.]

On parts of the body other than the face, the disease is even more
chronic, and is often attended with a considerable production of dense
fibrous tissue--the so-called _fibroid lupus_. Sometimes there is a
warty thickening of the epidermis--_lupus verrucosus_. In the fingers
and toes it may lead to a progressive destruction of tissue like that
observed in leprosy, and from the resulting loss of portions of the
digits it has been called _lupus mutilans_. In the lower extremity a
remarkable form of the disease is sometimes met with, to which the term
_lupus elephantiasis_ (Fig. 96) has been applied. It commences as an
ordinary lupus of the toes or dorsum of the foot, from which the
tuberculous infection spreads to the lymph vessels, and the limb as a
whole becomes enormously swollen and unshapely.

Finally, a long-standing lupus, especially on the cheek, may become the
seat of epithelioma--_lupus epithelioma_--usually of the exuberant or
cauliflower type, which, like other epitheliomas that originate in scar
tissue, presents little tendency to infect the lymphatics.

The _diagnosis_ of lupus is founded on the chronic progress and long
duration, and the central scarring with peripheral extension of the
disease. On the face it is most liable to be confused with syphilis and
with rodent cancer. The syphilitic lesion belongs to the tertiary
period, and although presenting a superficial resemblance to
tuberculosis, its progress is more rapid, so that within a few months it
may involve an area of skin as wide as would be affected by lupus in as
many years. Further, it readily yields to anti-syphilitic treatment. In
cases of tertiary syphilis in which the nose is destroyed, it will be
noticed that the bones have suffered most, while in lupus the
destruction of tissue involves chiefly the soft parts.

Rodent cancer is liable to be mistaken for lupus, because it affects the
same parts of the face; it is equally chronic, and may partly heal. It
begins later in life, however, the margin of the ulcer is more sharply
defined, and often presents a "rolled" appearance.

_Treatment._--When the disease is confined to a limited area, the most
rapid and certain cure is obtained by _excision_; larger areas are
scraped with the sharp spoon. The _ray treatment_ includes the use of
luminous, Rontgen, or radium rays, and possesses the advantage of being
comparatively painless and of being followed by the least amount of
scarring and deformity.

Encouraging results have also been obtained by the application of carbon
dioxide snow.

#Multiple subcutaneous tuberculous nodules# are met with chiefly in
children. They are indolent and painless, and rarely attract attention
until they break down and form abscesses, which are usually about the
size of a cherry, and when these burst sinuses or ulcers result. If the
overlying skin is still intact, the best treatment is excision. If the
abscess has already infected the skin, each focus should be scraped and
packed.

#Sporotrichosis# is a mycotic infection due to the sporothrix Shenkii.
It presents so many features resembling syphilis and tubercle that it is
frequently mistaken for one or other of these affections. It occurs
chiefly in males between fifteen and forty-five, who are farmers, fruit
and vegetable dealers, or florists. There is usually a history of trauma
of the nature of a scratch or a cut, and after a long incubation period
there develop a series of small, hard, round nodules in the skin and
subcutaneous tissue which, without pain or temperature, soften into
cold abscesses and leave indolent ulcers or sinuses. The infection is
of slow progress and follows the course of the lymphatics. From the
gelatinous pus the organism is cultivated without difficulty, and this
is the essential step in arriving at a diagnosis. The disease yields in
a few weeks to full doses of iodide of potassium.

#Elephantiasis.#--This term is applied to an excessive enlargement of a
part depending upon an overgrowth of the skin and subcutaneous cellular
tissue, and it may result from a number of causes, acting independently
or in combination. The condition is observed chiefly in the extremities
and in the external organs of generation.

_Elephantiasis from Lymphatic or Venous Obstruction._--Of this the
best-known example is _tropical elephantiasis_ (E. arabum), which is
endemic in Samoa, Barbadoes, and other places. It attacks the lower
extremity or the genitals in either sex (Figs. 97, 98). The disease is
usually ushered in with fever, and signs of lymphangitis in the part
affected. After a number of such attacks, the lymph vessels appear to
become obliterated, and the skin and subcutaneous cellular tissue, being
bathed in stagnant lymph--which possibly contains the products of
streptococci--take on an overgrowth, which continues until the part
assumes gigantic proportions. In certain cases the lymph trunks have
been found to be blocked with the parent worms of the filaria Bancrofti.
Cases of elephantiasis of the lower extremity are met with in this
country in which there are no filarial parasites in the lymph vessels,
and these present features closely resembling the tropical variety, and
usually follow upon repeated attacks of lymphangitis or erysipelas.

The part affected is enormously increased in size, and causes
inconvenience from its bulk and weight. In contrast to ordinary dropsy,
there is no pitting on pressure, and the swelling does not disappear on
elevation of the limb. The skin becomes rough and warty, and may hang
down in pendulous folds. Blisters form on the surface and yield an
abundant exudate of clear lymph. From neglect of cleanliness, the skin
becomes the seat of eczema or even of ulceration attended with foul
discharge.

Samson Handley has sought to replace the blocked lymph vessels by
burying in the subcutaneous tissue of the swollen part a number of stout
silk threads--_lymphangioplasty_. By their capillary action they drain
the lymph to a healthy region above, and thus enable it to enter the
circulation. It has been more successful in the face and upper limb than
in the lower extremity. If the tissues are infected with pus organisms,
a course of vaccines should precede the operation.

[Illustration: FIG. 97.--Elephantiasis in a woman aet. 45.]

A similar type of elephantiasis may occur after extirpation of the lymph
glands in the axilla or groin; in the leg in long-standing standing
varix and phlebitis with chronic ulcer; in the arm as a result of
extensive cancerous disease of the lymphatics in the axilla secondarily
to cancer of the breast; and in extensive tuberculous disease of the
lymphatics. The last-named is chiefly observed in the lower limb in
young adult women, and from its following upon lupus of the toes or foot
it has been called _lupus elephantiasis_. The tuberculous infection
spreads slowly up the limb by way of the lymph vessels, and as these are
obliterated the skin and cellular tissues become hypertrophied, and the
surface is studded over with fungating tuberculous masses of a livid
blue colour. As the more severe forms of the disease may prove dangerous
to life by pyogenic complications inducing gangrene of the limb, the
question of amputation may have to be considered.

[Illustration: FIG. 98.--Elephantiasis of Penis and Scrotum in native of
Demerara.

(Mr. Annandale's case.)]

Belonging to this group also is a form of _congenital elephantiasis_
resulting from the circular constriction of a limb _in utero_ by
amniotic bands.

_Elephantiasis occurring apart from lymphatic or venous obstruction_ is
illustrated by _elephantiasis nervorum_, in which there is an overgrowth
of the skin and cellular tissue of an extremity in association with
neuro-fibromatosis of the cutaneous nerves (Fig. 89); and by
_elephantiasis Graecorum_--a form of leprosy in which the skin of the
face becomes the seat of tumour-like masses consisting of leprous
nodules. It is also illustrated by _elephantiasis involving the scrotum_
as a result of prolonged irritation by the urine in cases in which the
penis has been amputated and the urine has infiltrated the scrotal
tissues over a period of years.

#Sebaceous Cysts.#--Atheromatous cysts or wens are formed in relation to
the sebaceous glands and hair follicles. They are commonly met with in
adults, on the scalp (Fig. 99), face, neck, back, and external genitals.
Sometimes they are multiple, and they may be met with in several members
of the same family. They are smooth, rounded, or discoid cysts, varying
in size from a split-pea to a Tangerine orange. In consistence they are
firm and elastic, or fluctuating, and are incorporated with the
overlying skin, but movable on the deeper structures. The orifice of the
partly blocked sebaceous follicle is sometimes visible, and the contents
of the cyst can be squeezed through the opening. The wall of the cyst is
composed of a connective-tissue capsule lined by stratified squamous
epithelium. The contents consist of accumulated epithelial cells, and
are at first dry and pearly white in appearance, but as a result of
fatty degeneration they break down into a greyish-yellow pultaceous and
semi-fluid material having a peculiar stale odour. It is probable that
the decomposition of the contents is the result of the presence of
bacteria, and that from the surgical point of view they should be
regarded as infective. A sebaceous cyst may remain indefinitely without
change, or may slowly increase in size, the skin over it becoming
stretched and closely adherent to the cyst wall as a result of friction
and pressure. The contents may ooze from the orifice of the duct and dry
on the skin surface, leading to the formation of a sebaceous horn
(Fig. 100). As a result of injury the cyst may undergo sudden
enlargement from haemorrhage into its interior.

Recurrent attacks of inflammation frequently occur, especially in wens
of the face and scalp. Suppuration may ensue and be followed by cure of
the cyst, or an offensive fungating ulcer forms which may be mistaken
for epithelioma. True cancerous transformation is rare.

Wens are to be _diagnosed_ from dermoids, from fatty tumours, and from
cold abscesses. Dermoids usually appear before adult life, and as they
nearly always lie beneath the fascia, the skin is movable over them. A
fatty tumour is movable, and is often lobulated. The confusion with a
cold abscess is most likely to occur in wens of the neck or back, and it
may be impossible without the use of an exploring needle to
differentiate between them.

[Illustration: FIG. 99.--Multiple Sebaceous Cysts or Wens; the larger
ones are of many years' duration.]

_Treatment._--The removal of wens is to be recommended while they are
small and freely movable, as they are then easily shelled out after
incising the overlying skin; sometimes splitting the cyst makes its
removal easier. Local anaesthesia is to be preferred. It is important
that none of the cyst wall be left behind. In large and adherent wens an
ellipse of skin is removed along with the cyst. When inflamed, it may be
impossible to dissect out the cyst, and the wall should be destroyed
with carbolic acid, the resulting wound being treated by the open
method.

#Moles.#--The term mole is applied to a pigmented, and usually hairy,
patch of skin, present at or appearing shortly after birth. The colour
varies from brown to black, according to the amount of melanin pigment
present. The lesion consists in an overgrowth of epidermis which often
presents an alveolar arrangement. Moles vary greatly in size: some are
mere dots, others are as large as the palm of the hand, and occasionally
a mole covers half the face. In addition to being unsightly, they bleed
freely when abraded, are liable to ulcerate from friction and pressure,
and occasionally become the starting-point of melanotic cancer. Rodent
cancer sometimes originates in the slightly pigmented moles met with on
the face. Overgrowths in relation to the cutaneous nerves, especially
the plexiform neuroma, occasionally originate in pigmented moles. Soldau
believes that the pigmentation and overgrowth of the epidermis in moles
are associated with, and probably result from, a fibromatosis of the
cutaneous nerves.

_Treatment._--The quickest way to get rid of a mole is to excise it; if
the edges of the gap cannot be brought together with sutures, recourse
should be had to grafting. In large hairy moles of the face whose size
forbids excision, radium or the X-rays should be employed. Excellent
results have been obtained by refrigeration with solid carbon dioxide.
In children and women with delicate skin, applications of from ten to
thirty seconds suffice. In persons with coarse skin an application of
one minute may be necessary, and it may have to be repeated.

#Horns.#--The _sebaceous_ horn results from the accumulation of the
dried contents of a wen on the surface of the skin: the sebaceous
material after drying up becomes cornified, and as fresh material is
added to the base the horn increases in length (Fig. 100). The _wart_
horn grows from a warty papilloma of the skin. _Cicatrix_ horns are
formed by the heaping up of epidermis in the scars that result from
burns. _Nail_ horns are overgrown nails (keratomata of the nail bed),
and are met with chiefly in the great toe of elderly bedridden patients.
If an ulcer forms at the base of a horn, it may prove the starting-point
of epithelioma, and for this reason, as well as for others, horns should
be removed.

[Illustration: FIG. 100.--Sebaceous Horn growing from Auricle.

(Dr. Kenneth Maclachan's case.)]

#New Growths in the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue.#--The _Angioma_ has
been described with diseases of blood vessels. _Fibroma._--Various types
of fibroma occur in the skin. A soft pedunculated fibroma, about the
size of a pea, is commonly met with, especially on the neck and trunk;
it is usually solitary, and is easily removed with scissors. The
multiple, soft fibroma known as _molluscum fibrosum_, which depends upon
a neuro-fibromatosis of the cutaneous nerves, is described with the
tumours of nerves. Hard fibromas occurring singly or in groups may be
met with, especially in the skin of the buttock, and may present a local
malignancy, recurring after removal like the "recurrent fibroid" of
Paget. The "painful subcutaneous nodule" is a solitary fibroma related
to one of the cutaneous nerves. The hard fibroma known as _keloid_ is
described with the affections of scars.

#Papilloma.#--The _common wart_ or verruca is an outgrowth of the
surface epidermis. It may be sessile or pedunculated hard or soft. The
surface may be smooth, or fissured and foliated like a cauliflower, or
it may be divided up into a number of spines. Warts are met with chiefly
on the hands, and are often multiple, occurring in clusters or in
successive crops. Multiple warts appear to result from some contagion,
the nature of which is unknown; they sometimes occur in an epidemic form
among school-children, and show a remarkable tendency to disappear
spontaneously. The solitary flat-topped wart which occurs on the face
of old people may, if irritated, become the seat of epithelioma. A warty
growth of the epidermis is a frequent accompaniment of moles and of that
variety of lupus known as _lupus verrucosus_.

_Treatment._--In the multiple warts of children the health should be
braced up by a change to the seaside. A dusting-powder, consisting of
boracic acid with 5 per cent. salicylic acid, may be rubbed into the
hands after washing and drying. The persistent warts of young adults
should be excised after freezing with chloride of ethyl. When cutting is
objected to, they may be painted night and morning with salicylic
collodion, the epidermis being dehydrated with alcohol before each
application.

_Venereal warts_ occur on the genitals of either sex, and may form large
cauliflower-like masses on the inner surface of the prepuce or of the
labia majora. Although frequently co-existing with gonorrhoea or
syphilis, they occur independently of these diseases, being probably
acquired by contact with another individual suffering from warts
(C. W. Cathcart). They give rise to considerable irritation and
suffering, and when cleanliness is neglected there may be an offensive
discharge.

In the female, the cauliflower-like masses are dissected from the labia;
in the male, the prepuce is removed and the warts on the glans are
snipped off with scissors. In milder cases, the warts usually disappear
if the parts are kept absolutely dry and clean. A useful dusting-powder
is one consisting of calamine and 5 per cent. salicylic acid; the
exsiccated sulphate of iron, in the form of a powder, may be employed in
cases which resist this treatment.

#Adenoma.#--This is a comparatively rare tumour growing from the glands
of the skin. One variety, known as the "tomato tumour," which apparently
originates from _the sweat glands_, is met with on the scalp and face in
women past middle life. These growths are often multiple; the individual
tumours vary in size, and the skin, which is almost devoid of hairs, is
glistening and tightly stretched over them. A similar tumour may occur
on the nose. The _sebaceous adenoma_, which originates from the
sebaceous glands, forms a projecting tumour on the face or scalp, and
when the skin is irritated it may ulcerate and fungate. The treatment
consists in the removal of the tumour along with the overlying skin.

The exuberant masses on the nose known as "rhinophyma," "lipoma nasi,"
or "potato nose" are of the nature of sebaceous adenoma, and are removed
by shaving them off with a knife until the normal shape of the nose is
restored Healing takes place with remarkable rapidity.

#Cancer.#--There are several types of primary cancer of the skin, the
most important being squamous epithelioma, rodent cancer, and melanotic
cancer.

[Illustration: FIG. 101.--Paraffin Epithelioma.]

#Epithelioma# occurs in a variety of forms. When originating in a small
ulcer or wart-for example on the face in old people--it presents the
features of a chronic indurated ulcer. A more exuberant and rapidly
growing form of epithelial cancer, described by Hutchinson as the
_crateriform ulcer_, commences on the face as a small red pimple which
rapidly develops into an elevated mass shaped like a bee-hive, and
breaks down in the centre. Epithelioma may develop anywhere on the body
in relation to long-standing ulcers, especially that resulting from a
burn or from lupus; this form usually presents an exuberant outgrowth of
epidermis not unlike a cauliflower. An interesting example of
epithelioma has been described by Neve of Kashmir. The natives in that
province are in the habit of carrying a fire-basket suspended from the
waist, which often burns the skin and causes a chronic ulcer, and many
of these ulcers become the seat of epithelioma, due, in Neve's opinion,
to the actual contact of the sooty pan with the skin.

The term _trade epithelioma_ has been applied to that form met with in
those who follow certain occupations, such as paraffin workers and
chimney-sweeps. The most recent member of this group is the _X-ray
carcinoma_, which is met with in those who are constantly exposed to the
irritation of the X-rays; there is first a chronic dermatitis with warty
overgrowth of the surface epithelium, pigmentation, and the formation of
fissures and warts. The trade epithelioma varies a good deal in
malignancy, but it tends to cause death in the same manner as other
epitheliomas.

Epithelial cancer has also been observed in those who have taken arsenic
over long periods for medicinal purposes.

[Illustration: FIG. 102.--Rodent Cancer of Inner Canthus.]

#Rodent Cancer# (Rodent Ulcer).--This is a cancer originating in the
sweat glands or sebaceous follicles, or in the foetal residues of
cutaneous glands. The cells are small and closely packed together in
alveoli or in reticulated columns; cell nests are rare. It is remarkably
constant in its seat of origin, being nearly always located on the
lateral aspect of the nose or in the vicinity of the lower eyelid
(Fig. 102). It is rare on the trunk or limbs. It commences as a small
flattened nodule in the skin, the epidermis over it being stretched and
shining. The centre becomes depressed, while the margins extend in the
form of an elevated ridge. Sooner or later the epidermis gives way in
the centre, exposing a smooth raw surface devoid of granulations.

[Illustration: FIG. 103.--Rodent Cancer of fifteen years' duration,
which has destroyed the contents of the Orbit.

(Sir Montagu Cotterill's case)]

The margin, while in parts irregular, is typically represented by a
well-defined "rolled" border which consists of the peripheral portion of
the cancer that has not broken down. The central ulcer may temporarily
heal. There is itching but little pain, and the condition progresses
extremely slowly; rodent cancers which have existed for many years are
frequently met with. The disease attacks and destroys every structure
with which it comes in contact, such as the eyelids, the walls of the
nasal cavities, and the bones of the face; hence it may produce the most
hideous deformities (Fig. 103). The patient may succumb to haemorrhage or
to infective complications such as erysipelas or meningitis.

Secondary growths in the lymph glands, while not unknown, are extremely
rare. We have only seen them once--in a case of rodent cancer in the
groin.

_Diagnosis._--Lupus is the disease most often mistaken for rodent
cancer. Lupus usually begins earlier in life, it presents apple-jelly
nodules, and lacks the rounded, elevated border. Syphilitic lesions
progress more rapidly, and also lack the characteristic margin. The
differentiation from squamous epithelioma is of considerable importance,
as the latter affection spreads more rapidly, involves the lymph glands
early, and is much more dangerous to life.

_Treatment._--In rodent cancers of limited size--say less than one inch
in diameter--free excision is the most rapid and certain method of
treatment. The alternative is the application of radium or of the
Rontgen rays, which, although requiring many exposures, results in cure
with the minimum of disfigurement. If the cancer already covers an
extensive area, or has invaded the cavity of the orbit or nose, radium
or X-rays yield the best results. The effect is soon shown by the
ingrowth of healthy epithelium from the surrounding skin, and at the
same time the discharge is lessened. Good results are also reported from
the application of carbon dioxide snow, especially when this follows
upon a course of X-ray treatment.

#Paget's disease# of the nipple is an epithelioma occurring in women
over forty years of age: a similar form of epithelioma is sometimes met
with at the umbilicus or on the genitals.

#Melanotic Cancer.#--Under this head are included all new growths which
contain an excess of melanin pigment. Many of these were formerly
described as melanotic sarcoma. They nearly always originate in a
pigmented mole which has been subjected to irritation. The primary
growth may remain so small that its presence is not even suspected, or
it may increase in size, ulcerate, and fungate. The amount of pigment
varies: when small in amount the growth is brown, when abundant it is a
deep black. The most remarkable feature is the rapidity with which the
disease becomes disseminated along the lymphatics, the first evidence of
which is an enlargement of the lymph glands. As the primary growth is
often situated on the sole of the foot or in the matrix of the nail of
the great toe, the femoral and inguinal glands become enlarged in
succession, forming tumours much larger than the primary growth.
Sometimes the dissemination involves the lymph vessels of the limb,
forming a series of indurated pigmented cords and nodules (Fig. 104).
Lastly, the dissemination may be universal throughout the body, and this
usually occurs at a comparatively early stage. The secondary growths are
deeply pigmented, being usually of a coal-black colour, and melanin
pigment may be present in the urine. When recurrence takes place in or
near the scar left by the operation, the cancer nodules are not
necessarily pigmented.

[Illustration: FIG. 104.--Diffuse Melanotic Cancer of Lymphatics of Skin
secondary to a Growth in the Sole of the Foot.]

To extirpate the disease it is necessary to excise the tumour, with a
zone of healthy skin around it and a somewhat large zone of the
underlying subcutaneous tissue and deep fascia. Hogarth Pringle
recommends that a broad strip of subcutaneous fascia up to and including
the nearest anatomical group of glands should be removed with the tumour
in one continuous piece.

#Secondary Cancer of the Skin.#--Cancer may spread to the skin from a
subjacent growth by direct continuity or by way of the lymphatics. Both
of these processes are so well illustrated in cases of mammary cancer
that they will be described in relation to that disease.

#Sarcoma# of various types is met with in the skin. The fibroma, after
excision, may recur as a fibro-sarcoma. The alveolar sarcoma commences
as a hard lump and increases in size until the epidermis gives way and
an ulcer is formed.

[Illustration: FIG. 105.--Melanotic Cancer of Forehead with Metastases
in Lymph Vessels and Glands.

(Mr. D. P. D. Wilkie's case.)]

A number of fresh tumours may spring up around the original growth.
Sometimes the primary growth appears in the form of multiple nodules
which tend to become confluent. Excision, unless performed early, is of
little avail, and in any case should be followed up by exposure to
radium.


AFFECTIONS OF CICATRICES

A cicatrix or scar consists of closely packed bundles of white fibres
covered by epidermis; the skin glands and hair follicles are usually
absent. The size, shape, and level of the cicatrix depend upon the
conditions which preceded healing.

A healthy scar, when recently formed, has a smooth, glossy surface of a
pinkish colour, which tends to become whiter as a result of obliteration
of the blood vessels concerned in its formation.

_Weak Scars._--A scar is said to be weak when it readily breaks down as
a result of irritation or pressure. The scars resulting from severe
burns and those over amputation stumps are especially liable to break
down from trivial causes. The treatment is to excise the weak portion of
the scar and bring the edges of the gap together.

_Contracted scars_ frequently cause deformity either by displacing
parts, such as the eyelid or lip, or by fixing parts and preventing the
normal movements--for example, a scar on the flexor aspect of a joint
may prevent extension of the forearm (Fig. 63). These are treated by
dividing the scar, correcting the deformity, and filling up the gap with
epithelial grafts, or with a flap of the whole thickness of the skin.
When deformity results from _depression of a scar_, as is not uncommon
after the healing of a sinus, the treatment is to excise the scar.
Depressed scars may be raised by the injection of paraffin into the
subcutaneous tissue.

_Painful Scars._--Pain in relation to a scar is usually due to nerve
fibres being compressed or stretched in the cicatricial tissue; and in
some cases to ascending neuritis. The treatment consists in excising the
scar or in stretching or excising a portion of the nerve affected.

_Pigmented or Discoloured Scars._--The best-known examples are the blue
coloration which results from coal-dust or gunpowder, the brown scars
resulting from chronic ulcer with venous congestion of the leg, and the
variously coloured scars caused by tattooing. The only satisfactory
method of getting rid of the coloration is to excise the scar; the edges
are brought together by sutures, or the raw surface is covered with
skin-grafts according to the size of the gap.

_Hypertrophied Scars._--Scars occasionally broaden out and become
prominent, and on exposed parts this may prove a source of
disappointment after operations such as those for goitre or tuberculous
glands in the neck. There is sometimes considerable improvement from
exposure to the X-rays.

_Keloid._--This term is applied to an overgrowth of scar tissue which
extends beyond the area of the original wound, and the name is derived
from the fact that this extension occurs in the form of radiating
processes, suggesting the claws of a crab. It is essentially a fibroma
or new growth of fibrous tissue, which commences in relation to the
walls of the smaller blood vessels; the bundles of fibrous tissue are
for the most part parallel with the surface, and the epidermis is
tightly stretched over them. It is more frequent in the negro and in
those who are, or have been, the subjects of tuberculous disease.

[Illustration: FIG. 106.--Recurrent Keloid in scar left by operation for
tuberculous glands in a girl aet. 7.]

Keloid may attack scars of any kind, such as those resulting from
leech-bites, acne pustules, boils or blisters; those resulting from
operation or accidental wounds; and the scars resulting from burns,
especially when situated over the sternum, appear to be specially
liable. The scar becomes more and more conspicuous, is elevated above
the surface, of a pinkish or brownish-pink pink colour, and sends out
irregular prolongations around its margins. The patient may complain of
itching and burning, and of great sensitiveness of the scar, even to
contact with the clothing.

There is a natural hesitation to excise keloid because of the fear of
its returning in the new scar. The application of radium is, so far as
we know, the only means of preventing such return. The irritation
associated with keloid may be relieved by the application of salicylic
collodion or of salicylic and creosote plaster.

_Epithelioma_ is liable to attack scars in old people, especially those
which result from burns sustained early in childhood and have never
really healed. From the absence of lymphatics in scar tissue, the
disease does not spread to the glands until it has invaded the tissues
outside the scar; the prognosis is therefore better than in epithelioma
in general. It should be excised widely; in the lower extremity when
there is also extensive destruction of tissue from an antecedent chronic
ulcer or osteomyelitis, it may be better to amputate the limb.


AFFECTION OF THE NAILS

_Injuries._--When a nail is contused or crushed, blood is extravasated
beneath it, and the nail is usually shed, a new one growing in its
place. A splinter driven underneath the nail causes great pain, and if
organisms are carried in along with it, may give rise to infective
complications. The free edge of the nail should be clipped away to allow
of the removal of the foreign body and the necessary disinfection.

_Trophic Changes._--The growth of the nails may be interfered with in
any disturbance of the general health. In nerve lesions, such as a
divided nerve-trunk, the nails are apt to suffer, becoming curved,
brittle, or furrowed, or they may be shed.

_Onychia_ is the term applied to an infection of the soft parts around
the nail or of the matrix beneath it. The commonest form of onychia has
already been referred to with whitlow. There is a superficial variety
resulting from the extension of a purulent blister beneath the nail
lifting it up from its bed, the pus being visible through the nail. The
nail as well as the raised horny layer of the epidermis should be
removed. A deeper and more troublesome onychia results from infection at
the nail-fold; the infection spreads slowly beneath the fold until it
reaches the matrix, and a drop or two of pus forms beneath the nail,
usually in the region of the lunule. This affection entails a
disability of the finger which may last for weeks unless it is properly
treated. Treatment by hyperaemia, using a suction bell, should first be
tried, and, failing improvement, the nail-fold and lunule should be
frozen, and a considerable portion removed with the knife; if only a
small portion of the nail is removed, the opening is blocked by
granulations springing from the matrix. A new nail is formed, but it is
liable to be misshapen.

_Tuberculous onychia_ is met with in children and adolescents. It
appears as a livid or red swelling at the root of the nail and spreading
around its margins. The epidermis, which is thin and shiny, gives way,
and the nail is usually shed.

_Syphilitic_ affections of the nails assume various aspects. A primary
chancre at the edge of the nail may be mistaken for a whitlow,
especially if it is attended with much pain. Other forms of onychia
occur during secondary syphilis simultaneously with the skin eruptions,
and may prove obstinate and lead to shedding of the nails. They also
occur in inherited syphilis. In addition to general treatment, an
ointment containing 5 per cent. of oleate of mercury should be applied
locally.

_Ingrowing Toe-nail._--This is more accurately described as an
overgrowth of the soft tissues along the edge of the nail. It is most
frequently met with in the great toe in young adults with flat-foot
whose feet perspire freely, who wear ill-fitting shoes, and who cut
their toe-nails carelessly or tear them with their fingers. Where the
soft tissues are pressed against the edge of the nail, the skin gives
way and there is the formation of exuberant granulations and of
discharge which is sometimes foetid. The affection is a painful one and
may unfit the patient for work. In mild cases the condition may be
remedied by getting rid of contributing causes and by disinfecting the
skin and nail; the nail is cut evenly, and the groove between it and the
skin packed with an antiseptic dusting-powder, such as boracic acid. In
more severe cases it may be necessary to remove an ellipse of tissue
consisting of the edge of the nail, together with the subjacent matrix
and the redundant nail-fold.

_Subungual exostosis_ is an osteoma growing from the terminal phalanx of
the great toe (Fig. 107). It raises the nail and may be accompanied by
ulceration of the skin over the most prominent part of the growth. The
soft parts, including the nail, should be reflected towards the dorsum
in the form of a flap, the base of the exostosis divided with the
chisel, and the exostosis removed.

_Malignant disease_ in relation to the nails is rare. Squamous
epithelioma and melanotic cancer are the forms met with. Treatment
consists in amputating the digit concerned, and in removing the
associated lymph glands._Gangrene_ may ensue if the blood supply is seriously interfered with,
                        or the signs of _ischaemia_ may develop; the muscles lose their
                        elasticity, become hard and paralysed, and anaesthesia of the "glove" or
                        "stocking" type, with other alterations of sensation ensue. Apart from
                        ischaemia, _reflex paralysis_ of motion and sensation of a transient kind
                        may follow injury of a large vessel.
                        _Treatment_ is carried out on the same lines as for similar injuries due
                        to other causes.
                        INJURIES OF VEINS
                        Veins are subject to the same forms of injury as arteries, and the
                        results are alike in both, such variations as occur being dependent
                        partly on the difference in their anatomical structure, and partly on
                        the conditions of the circulation through them.
                        #Subcutaneous rupture# of veins occur most frequently in association
                        with fractures and in the reduction of dislocations. The veins most
                        commonly ruptured are the popliteal, the axillary, the femoral, and the
                        subclavian. On account of the smaller amount of elastic and muscular
                        tissue in the wall of a vein, the contraction and retraction of its
                        walls are less than in an artery, and so bleeding may continue for a
                        longer period. On the other hand, owing to the lower blood-pressure the
                        outflow goes on more slowly, and the gradually increasing pressure
                        produced by the extravasated blood is usually sufficient to arrest the
                        haemorrhage before it becomes serious. As an aid in diagnosing the source
                        of the bleeding, it should be remembered that the rupture of a vein does
                        not affect the pulsation in the limb beyond. The risks are practically
                        the same as when an artery is ruptured, excepting that of aneurysm, and
                        the treatment is carried out on the same lines, but it is seldom
                        necessary to operate for the purpose of applying a ligature to the
                        injured vein.

                        #Wounds# of veins--punctured and incised--frequently occur in the course
                        of operations; for example, in the removal of tumours or diseased glands
                        from the neck, the axilla, or the groin. They are also met with as a
                        result of accidental stabs and of suicidal or homicidal injuries. The
                        haemorrhage from a large vein so damaged is usually profuse, but it is
                        more readily controlled by external pressure than that from an artery.
                        When a vein is merely punctured, the bleeding may be arrested by
                        pressure with a pad of gauze, or by a lateral ligature--that is, picking
                        up the margins of the rent in the wall and securing them with a
                        ligature without occluding the lumen. In the large veins, such as the
                        internal jugular, the femoral, or the axillary, it is usually possible
                        to suture the opening in the wall. This does not necessarily result in
                        thrombosis in the vessel, or in obliteration of its lumen.

                        When an _artery and vein are simultaneously wounded_, the features
                        peculiar to each are present in greater or less degree. In the limbs
                        gangrene may ensue, especially if the wound is infected. Punctured and
                        gun-shot wounds implicating both artery and vein are liable to be
                        followed by the development of arterio-venous aneurysm.

                        #Entrance of Air into Veins--Air Embolism.#--This serious, though
                        fortunately rare, accident is apt to occur in the course of operations
                        in the region of the thorax, neck, or axilla, if a large vein is opened
                        and fails to collapse on account of the rigidity of its walls, its
                        incorporation in a dense fascia, or from traction being made upon it. If
                        the wound in a vein is thus held open, the negative pressure during
                        inspiration sucks air into the right side of the heart. This is
                        accompanied by a hissing or gurgling sound, and with the next expiration
                        some frothy blood escapes from the wound. The patient instantly becomes
                        pale, the pupils dilate, respiration becomes laboured, and although the
                        heart may continue to beat forcibly, the peripheral pulse is weak, and
                        may even be imperceptible. On auscultating the heart, a churning sound
                        may be heard. Death may result in a few minutes; or the heart may slowly
                        regain its power and recovery take place.

                        _Prevention._--In operations in the "dangerous area"--as the region of
                        the root of the neck is called in this connection--care must be taken
                        not to cut or divide any vein before it has been secured by forceps, and
                        to apply ligatures securely and at once. Deep wounds in this region
                        should be kept filled with normal salt solution. Immediately a cut is
                        recognised in a vein, a finger should be placed over the vessel on the
                        cardiac side of the wound, and kept there until the opening is secured.

                        _Treatment._--Little can be done after the air has actually entered the
                        vein beyond endeavouring to maintain the heart's action by hypodermic
                        injections of ether or strychnin and the application of mustard or hot
                        cloths over the chest. The head at the same time should be lowered to
                        prevent syncope. Attempts to withdraw the air by suction, and the
                        employment of artificial respiration, have proved futile, and are, by
                        some, considered dangerous. In a desperate case massage of the heart
                        might be tried.

                        THE NATURAL ARREST OF HAEMORRHAGE AND THE REPAIR OF BLOOD
                        VESSELS

                        #Primary Haemorrhage.#--The term primary haemorrhage is applied to the
                        bleeding which follows immediately on the wounding of a blood vessel.
                        The natural process by which such haemorrhage is arrested varies with the
                        character of the wound in the vessel and may be modified by accidental
                        circumstances.

                        (a) _Repair of completely divided Artery._--When an artery is
                        _completely_ divided, the circular fibres of the muscular coat contract,
                        so that the lumen of the cut ends is diminished, and at the same time
                        each segment retracts within its sheath in virtue of the recoil of the
                        elastic elements in its walls, the tunica intima curls up in the
                        interior of the vessel, and the tunica externa collapses over the cut
                        ends. The blood that escapes from the injured vessel fills the
                        interstices of the tissues, and, coagulating, forms a clot which
                        temporarily arrests the bleeding. That part of the clot which lies
                        between the divided ends of the vessel and in the cellular tissue
                        outside, is known as the _external clot_, while the portion which
                        projects into the lumen of the vessel is known as the _internal clot_,
                        and it usually extends as far as the nearest collateral branch. These
                        processes constitute what is known as the _temporary arrest of
                        haemorrhage_, which, it will be observed, is effected by the contraction
                        and retraction of the divided artery and by clotting.

                        The _permanent arrest_ takes place by the transformation of the clot
                        into scar tissue. The internal clot plays the most important part in the
                        process; it becomes invaded by leucocytes and proliferating endothelial
                        and connective-tissue cells, and new blood vessels permeate the mass,
                        which is thus converted into granulation tissue. This is ultimately
                        replaced by fibrous tissue, which permanently occludes the end of the
                        vessel. Concurrently and by the same process the external clot is
                        converted into scar tissue.

                        If a divided artery is _ligated at its cut end_, the tension of the
                        ligature is usually sufficient to rupture the inner and middle coats,
                        which curl up within the lumen, the outer coat alone being held in the
                        grasp of the ligature. An internal clot forms and, becoming organised,
                        permanently occludes the vessel as above described. The ligature and the
                        small portion of vessel beyond it are subsequently absorbed.

                        In course of time the collateral branches of the vessel above and below
                        the level of section enlarge and their inter-communication becomes more
                        free, so that even when large trunks have been divided the vascular
                        supply of the parts beyond may be completely restored. This is known as
                        the development of the _collateral circulation_.

                        _Imperfect Collateral Circulation._--While the development of the
                        collateral circulation after the ligation or obstruction from other
                        cause of a main arterial trunk may be sufficient to prevent gangrene of
                        the limb, it may be insufficient for its adequate nourishment; it may be
                        cold, bluish in colour, and there may be necrosis of the skin over bony
                        points; this is notably the case in the lower extremity after ligation
                        of the femoral or popliteal artery, when patches of skin may die over
                        the prominence of the heel, the balls of the toes, the projecting base
                        of the fifth metatarsal and the external malleolus.

                        If, during the period of reaction, the blood-pressure rises

                        considerably, the occluding clot at the divided end of the vessel may be
                        washed away or the ligature displaced, permitting of fresh bleeding
                        taking place--_reactionary_ or _intermediary haemorrhage_ (p. 272).

                        In the event of the wound becoming infected with pyogenic organisms, the
                        occluding blood-clot or the young fibrous tissue may become
                        disintegrated in the suppurative process, and the bleeding start
                        afresh--_secondary haemorrhage_ (p. 273).

                        (b) If an artery is only _partly cut across_, the divided fibres of
                        the tunica muscularis contract and those of the tunica externa retract,
                        with the result that a more or less circular hole is formed in the wall
                        of the vessel, from which free bleeding takes place, as the conditions
                        are unfavourable for the formation of an occluding clot. Even if a clot
                        does form, when the blood-pressure rises it is readily displaced,
                        leading to reactionary haemorrhage. Should the wound become infected,
                        secondary haemorrhage is specially liable to occur. A further risk
                        attends this form of injury, in that the intra-vascular tension may in
                        time lead to gradual stretching of the scar tissue which closes the gap
                        in the vessel wall, with the result that a localised dilatation or
                        diverticulum forms, constituting a _traumatic aneurysm_.

                        (c) When the injury merely takes the form of a _puncture_ or _small
                        incision_ a blood-clot forms between the edges, becomes organised, and
                        is converted into cicatricial tissue which seals the aperture. Such
                        wounds may also be followed by reactionary or secondary haemorrhage, or
                        later by the formation of a traumatic aneurysm.

                        _Conditions which influence the Natural Arrest of Haemorrhage._--The
                        natural arrest of bleeding is favoured by tearing or crushing of the
                        vessel walls, owing to the contraction and retraction of the coats and
                        the tendency of blood to coagulate when in contact with damaged tissue.
                        Hence the primary haemorrhage following lacerated wounds is seldom
                        copious. The occurrence of syncope or of profound shock also helps to
                        stop bleeding by reducing the force of the heart's action.

                        On the other hand, there are conditions which retard the natural arrest.
                        When, for example, a vessel is only partly divided, the contraction and
                        retraction of the muscular coat, instead of diminishing the calibre of
                        the artery, causes the wound in the vessel to gape; by completing the
                        division of the vessel under these circumstances the bleeding can often
                        be arrested. In certain situations, also, the arteries are so intimately
                        connected with their sheaths, that when cut across they were unable to
                        retract and contract--for example, in the scalp, in the penis, and in
                        bones--and copious bleeding may take place from comparatively small
                        vessels. This inability of the vessels to contract and retract is met
                        with also in inflamed and oedematous parts and in scar tissue. Arteries
                        divided in the substance of a muscle also sometimes bleed unduly. Any
                        increase in the force of the heart's action, such as may result from
                        exertion, excitement, or over-stimulation, also interferes with the
                        natural arrest. Lastly, in bleeders, there are conditions which
                        interfere with the natural arrest of haemorrhage.

                        #Repair of a Vessel ligated in its Continuity.#--When a ligature is
                        applied to an artery it should be pulled sufficiently tight to occlude
                        the lumen without causing rupture of its coats. It often happens,
                        however, that the compression causes rupture of the inner and middle
                        coats, so that only the outer coat remains in the grasp of the ligature.
                        While this weakens the wall of the vessel, it has the advantage of
                        hastening coagulation, by bringing the blood into contact with damaged
                        tissue. Whether the inner and middle coats are ruptured or not, blood
                        coagulates both above and below the ligature, the proximal clot being
                        longer and broader than that on the distal side. In small arteries these
                        clots extend as far as the nearest collateral branch, but in the larger
                        trunks their length varies. The permanent occlusion of those portions of
                        the vessel occupied by clot is brought about by the formation of
                        granulation tissue, and its replacement by cicatricial tissue, so that
                        the occluded segment of the vessel is represented by a fibrous cord. In
                        this process the coagulum only plays a passive role by forming a
                        scaffolding on which the granulation tissue is built up. The ligature
                        surrounding the vessel, and the elements of the clot, are ultimately
                        absorbed.

                        #Repair of Veins.#--The process of repair in veins is the same as that
                        in arteries, but the thrombosed area may become canalised and the
                        circulation through the vessel be re-established.

                        HAEMORRHAGE IN SURGICAL OPERATIONS

                        The management of the haemorrhage which accompanies an operation includes
                        (a) preventive measures, and (b) the arrest of the bleeding.

                        #Prevention of Haemorrhage.#--Whenever possible, haemorrhage should be
                        controlled by _digital compression_ of the main artery supplying the
                        limb rather than by a tourniquet. If efficiently applied compression
                        reduces the immediate loss of blood to a minimum, and the bleeding from
                        small vessels that follows the removal of the tourniquet is avoided.
                        Further, the pressure of a tourniquet has been shown to be a material
                        factor in producing shock.

                        In selecting a point at which to apply digital compression, it is
                        essential that the vessel should be lying over a bone which will furnish
                        the necessary resistance. The common carotid, for example, is pressed
                        backward and medially against the transverse process (carotid tubercle)
                        of the sixth cervical vertebra; the temporal against the temporal
                        process (zygoma) in front of the ear; and the facial against the
                        mandible at the anterior edge of the masseter.

                        In the upper extremity, the subclavian is pressed against the first rib
                        by making pressure downwards and backwards in the hollow above the
                        clavicle; the axillary and brachial by pressing against the shaft of the
                        humerus.

                        In the lower extremity, the femoral is controlled by pressing in a
                        direction backward and slightly upward against the brim of the pelvis,
                        midway between the symphysis pubis and the anterior superior iliac
                        spine.

                        The abdominal aorta may be compressed against the bodies of the lumbar
                        vertebrae opposite the umbilicus, if the spine is arched well forwards
                        over a pillow or sand-bag, or by the method suggested by Macewen, in
                        which the patient's spine is arched forwards by allowing the lower
                        extremities and pelvis to hang over the end of the table, while the
                        assistant, standing on a stool, applies his closed fist over the
                        abdominal aorta and compresses it against the vertebral column.
                        Momburg recommends an elastic cord wound round the body between the
                        iliac crest and the lower border of the ribs, but this procedure has
                        caused serious damage to the intestine.

                        When digital compression is not available, the most convenient and
                        certain means of preventing haemorrhage--say in an amputation--is by the
                        use of some form of _tourniquet_, such as the elastic tube of Esmarch or
                        of Foulis, or an elastic bandage, or the screw tourniquet of Petit.
                        Before applying any of these it is advisable to empty the limb of blood.
                        This is best done after the manner suggested by Lister: the limb is held
                        vertical for three or four minutes; the veins are thus emptied by
                        gravitation, and they collapse, and as a physiological result of this
                        the arteries reflexly contract, so that the quantity of blood entering
                        the limb is reduced to a minimum. With the limb still elevated the
                        tourniquet is firmly applied, a part being selected where the vessel can
                        be pressed directly against a bone, and where there is no risk of
                        exerting injurious pressure on the nerve-trunks. The tourniquet should
                        be applied over several layers of gauze or lint to protect the skin, and
                        the first turn of the tourniquet must be rapidly and tightly applied to
                        arrest completely the arterial flow, otherwise the veins only are
                        obstructed and the limb becomes congested. In the lower extremity the
                        best place to apply a tourniquet is the middle third of the thigh; in
                        the upper extremity, in the middle of the arm. A tourniquet should never
                        be applied tighter or left on longer than is absolutely necessary.

                        The screw tourniquet of Petit is to be preferred when it is desired to
                        intermit the flow through the main artery as in operations for aneurysm.

                        When a tourniquet cannot conveniently be applied, or when its presence
                        interferes with the carrying out of the operation--as, for example, in
                        amputations at the hip or shoulder--the haemorrhage may be controlled by
                        preliminary ligation of the main artery above the seat of operation--for
                        instance, the external iliac or the subclavian. For such contingencies
                        also the steel skewers used by Spence and Wyeth, or a special clamp or
                        forceps, such as that suggested by Lynn Thomas, may be employed. In the
                        case of vessels which it is undesirable to occlude permanently, such as
                        the common carotid, the temporary application of a ligature or clamp is
                        useful.

                        #Arrest of Haemorrhage.#--_Ligature._--This is the best means of securing
                        the larger vessels. The divided vessel having been caught with forceps
                        as near to its cut end as possible, a ligature of catgut or silk is tied
                        round it. When there is difficulty in applying a ligature securely, for
                        example in a dense tissue like the scalp or periosteum, or in a friable
                        tissue like the thyreoid gland or the mesentery, a stitch should be
                        passed so as to surround the bleeding vessel a short distance from its
                        end, in this way ensuring a better hold and preventing the ligature from
                        slipping.

                        If the haemorrhage is from a partly divided vessel, this should be
                        completely cut across to enable its walls to contract and retract, and
                        to facilitate the application of forceps and ligatures.

                        _Torsion._--This method is seldom employed except for comparatively
                        small vessels, but it is applicable to even the largest arteries. In
                        employing torsion, the end of the vessel is caught with forceps, and the
                        terminal portion twisted round several times. The object is to tear the
                        inner and middle coats so that they curl up inside the lumen, while the
                        outer fibrous coat is twisted into a cord which occludes the end of the
                        vessel.

                        _Forci-pressure._--Bleeding from the smallest arteries and from
                        arterioles can usually be arrested by firmly squeezing them for a few
                        minutes with artery forceps. It is usually found that on the removal of
                        the forceps at the end of an operation no further haemorrhage takes
                        place. By the use of specially strong clamps, such as the angiotribes of
                        Doyen, large trunks may be occluded by pressure.

                        _Cautery._--The actual cautery or Paquelin's thermo-cautery is seldom
                        employed to arrest haemorrhage, but is frequently useful in preventing
                        it, as, for example, in the removal of piles, or in opening the bowel in
                        colostomy. It is used at a dull-red heat, which sears the divided ends
                        of the vessel and so occludes the lumen. A bright-red or a white heat
                        cuts the vessel across without occluding it. The separation of the
                        slough produced by the charring of the tissues is sometimes attended
                        with secondary bleeding.

                        _Haemostatics_ or _Styptics_.--The local application of haemostatics is
                        seldom to be recommended. In the treatment of epistaxis or bleeding from
                        the nose, of haemorrhage from the socket of a tooth, and sometimes from
                        ulcerating or granulating surfaces, however, they may be useful. All
                        clots must be removed and the drug applied directly to the bleeding
                        surface. Adrenalin and turpentine are the most useful drugs for this
                        purpose.

                        Haemorrhage from bone, for example the skull, may be arrested by means of
                        Horsley's aseptic plastic wax. To stop persistent oozing from soft
                        tissues, Horsley successfully applied a portion of living vascular
                        tissue, such as a fragment of muscle, which readily adheres to the
                        oozing surface and yields elements that cause coagulation of the blood
                        by thrombo-kinetic processes. When examined after two or three days the
                        muscle has been found to be closely adherent and undergoing
                        organisation.

                        #Arrest of Accidental Haemorrhage.#--The most efficient means of
                        temporarily controlling haemorrhage is by pressure applied with the
                        finger, or with a pad of gauze, directly over the bleeding point. While
                        this is maintained an assistant makes digital pressure, or applies a
                        tourniquet, over the main vessel of the limb on the proximal side of the
                        bleeding point. A useful _emergency tourniquet_ may be improvised by
                        folding a large handkerchief _en cravatte_, with a cork or piece of wood
                        in the fold to act as a pad. The handkerchief is applied round the
                        limb, with the pad over the main artery, and the ends knotted on the
                        lateral aspect of the limb. With a strong piece of wood the handkerchief
                        is wound up like a Spanish windlass, until sufficient pressure is
                        exerted to arrest the bleeding.

                        When haemorrhage is taking place from a number of small vessels, its
                        arrest may be effected by elevation of the bleeding part, particularly
                        if it is a limb. By this means the force of the circulation is
                        diminished and the formation of coagula favoured. Similarly, in wounds
                        of the hand or forearm, or of the foot or leg, bleeding may be arrested
                        by placing a pad in the flexure and acutely flexing the limb at the
                        elbow or knee respectively.

                        #Reactionary Haemorrhage.#--Reactionary or intermediary haemorrhage
                        is really a recurrence of primary bleeding. As the name indicates, it
                        occurs during the period of reaction--that is, within the first twelve
                        hours after an operation or injury. It may be due to the increase in the
                        blood-pressure that accompanies reaction displacing clots which have
                        formed in the vessels, or causing vessels to bleed which did not bleed
                        during the operation; to the slipping of a ligature; or to the giving
                        way of a grossly damaged portion of the vessel wall. In the scrotum, the
                        relaxation of the dartos during the first few hours after operation
                        occasionally leads to reactionary haemorrhage.

                        As a rule, reactionary haemorrhage takes place from small vessels as a
                        result of the displacement of occluding clots, and in many cases the
                        haemorrhage stops when the bandages and soaked dressings are removed. If
                        not, it is usually sufficient to remove the clots and apply firm
                        pressure, and in the case of a limb to elevate it. Should the haemorrhage
                        recur, the wound must be reopened, and ligatures applied to the bleeding
                        vessels. Douching the wound with hot sterilised water (about 110 o F.),
                        and plugging it tightly with gauze, are often successful in arresting
                        capillary oozing. When the bleeding is more copious, it is usually due
                        to a ligature having slipped from a large vessel such as the external
                        jugular vein after operations in the neck, and the wound must be opened
                        up and the vessel again secured. The internal administration of heroin
                        or morphin, by keeping the patient quiet, may prove useful in preventing
                        the recurrence of haemorrhage.

                        #Secondary Haemorrhage.#--The term secondary haemorrhage refers to
                        bleeding that is delayed in its onset and is due to pyogenic infection
                        of the tissues around an artery. The septic process causes softening and
                        erosion of the wall of the artery so that it gives way under the
                        pressure of the contained blood. The leakage may occur in drops, or as a
                        rush of blood, according to the extent of the erosion, the size of the
                        artery concerned, and the relations of the erosion to the surrounding
                        tissues. When met with as a complication of a wound there is an
                        interval--usually a week to ten days--between the receipt of the wound
                        and the first haemorrhage, this time being required for the extension of
                        the septic process to the wall of the artery and the consequent erosion
                        of its coats. When secondary haemorrhage occurs apart from a wound, there
                        is a similar septic process attacking the wall of the artery from the
                        outside; for example in sloughing sore-throat, the separation of a
                        slough may implicate the wall of an artery and be followed by serious
                        and it may be fatal haemorrhage. The mechanical pressure of a fragment of
                        bone or of a rubber drainage tube upon the vessel may aid the septic
                        process in causing erosion of the artery. In pre-Listerian days, the
                        silk ligature around the artery likewise favoured the changes that lead
                        to secondary haemorrhage, and the interesting observation was often made,
                        that when the collateral circulation was well established, the leakage
                        occurred on the _distal_ side of the ligature. While it may happen that
                        the initial haemorrhage is rapidly fatal, as for example when the
                        external carotid or one of its branches suddenly gives way, it is quite
                        common to have one, two or more _warning haemorrhages_ before the leakage
                        on a large scale, which is rapidly fatal.

                        The _appearances of the wound_ in cases complicated by secondary
                        haemorrhage are only characteristic in so far that while obviously
                        infected, there is an absence of all reaction; instead of frankly
                        suppurating, there is little or no discharge and the surrounding
                        cellular tissue and the limb beyond are oedematous and pit on pressure.

                        The _general symptoms_ of septic poisoning in cases of secondary
                        haemorrhage vary widely in severity: they may be so slight that the
                        general health is scarcely affected and the convalescence from an
                        operation, for example, may be apparently normal except that the wound
                        does not heal satisfactorily. For example, a patient may be recovering
                        from an operation such as the removal of an epithelioma of the mouth,
                        pharynx or larynx and the associated lymph glands in the neck, and be
                        able to be up and going about his room, when, suddenly, without warning
                        and without obvious cause, a rush of blood occurs from the mouth or the
                        incompletely healed wound in the neck, causing death within a few
                        minutes.

                        On the other hand, the toxaemia may be of a profound type associated with
                        marked pallor and progressive failure of strength, which, of itself,
                        even when the danger from haemorrhage has been overcome, may have a fatal
                        termination. The _prognosis_ therefore in cases of secondary haemorrhage
                        can never be other than uncertain and unfavourable; the danger from loss
                        of blood _per se_ is less when the artery concerned is amenable to
                        control by surgical measures.

                        _Treatment._--The treatment of secondary haemorrhage includes the use of
                        local measures to arrest the bleeding, the employment of general
                        measures to counteract the accompanying toxaemia, and when the loss of
                        blood has been considerable, the treatment of the bloodless state.

                        _Local Measures to arrest the Haemorrhage._--The occurrence of even
                        slight haemorrhages from a septic wound in the vicinity of a large blood
                        vessel is to be taken seriously; it is usually necessary to _open up the
                        wound_, clear out the clots and infected tissues with a sharp spoon,
                        disinfect the walls of the cavity with eusol or hydrogen peroxide, and
                        _pack_ it carefully but not too tightly with gauze impregnated with some
                        antiseptic, such as "bipp," so that, if the bleeding does not recur, it
                        may be left undisturbed for several days. The packing should if possible
                        be brought into actual contact with the leaking point in the vessel, and
                        so arranged as to make pressure on the artery above the erosion. The
                        dressings and bandage are then applied, with the limb in the attitude
                        that will diminish the force of the stream through the main artery, for
                        example, flexion at the elbow in haemorrhage from the deep palmar arch.
                        Other measures for combating the local sepsis, such as the irrigation
                        method of Carrel, may be considered.

                        If the wound involves one of the extremities, it may be useful; and it
                        imparts confidence to the nurse, and, it may be, to the patient, if a
                        Petit's tourniquet is loosely applied above the wound, which the nurse
                        is instructed to tighten up in the event of bleeding taking place.

                        _Ligation of the Artery._--If the haemorrhage recurs in spite of packing
                        the wound, or if it is serious from the outset and likely to be critical
                        if repeated, ligation of the artery itself or of the trunk from which it
                        springs, at a selected spot higher up, should be considered. This is
                        most often indicated in wounds of the extremities.

                        As examples of proximal ligation for secondary haemorrhage may be cited
                        ligation of the hypogastric artery for haemorrhage in the buttock, of the
                        common iliac for haemorrhage in the thigh, of the brachial in the upper
                        arm for haemorrhage from the deep palmar arch, and of the posterior
                        tibial behind the medial malleolus for haemorrhage from the sole of the
                        foot.

                        _Amputation_ is the last resource, and should be decided upon if the
                        haemorrhage recurs after proximal ligation, or if this has been followed
                        by gangrene of the limb; it should also be considered if the nature of
                        the wound and the virulence of the sepsis would of themselves justify
                        removal of the limb. Every surgeon can recall cases in which a timely
                        amputation has been the means of saving life.

                        The _counteraction of the toxaemia_ and the _treatment of the bloodless
                        state_, are carried out on the usual lines.

                        #Haemorrhage of Toxic Origin.#--Mention must also be made of haemorrhages
                        which depend upon infective or toxic conditions and in which no gross
                        lesion of the vessels can be discovered. The bleeding occurs as an
                        oozing, which may be comparatively slight and unimportant, or by its
                        persistence may become serious. It takes place into the superficial
                        layers of the skin, from mucous membranes, and into the substance of
                        such organs as the pancreas. Haemorrhage from the stomach and intestine,
                        attended with a brown or black discoloration of the vomit and of the
                        stools, is one of the best known examples: it is not uncommonly met with
                        in infective conditions originating in the appendix, intestine,
                        gall-bladder, and other abdominal organs. Haemorrhage from the mucous
                        membrane of the stomach after abdominal operations--apparently also due
                        to toxic causes and not to the operation--gives rise to the so-called
                        _post-operative haematemesis_.

                        #Constitutional Effects of Haemorrhage.#--The severity of the symptoms
                        resulting from haemorrhage depends as much on the rapidity with which the
                        bleeding takes place as on the amount of blood lost. The sudden loss of
                        a large quantity, whether from an open wound or into a serous
                        cavity--for example, after rupture of the liver or spleen--is attended
                        with marked pallor of the surface of the body and coldness of the skin,
                        especially of the face, feet, and hands. The skin is moist with a cold,
                        clammy sweat, and beads of perspiration stand out on the forehead. The
                        pulse becomes feeble, soft, and rapid, and the patient is dull and
                        listless, and complains of extreme thirst. The temperature is usually
                        sub-normal; and the respiration rapid, shallow, and sighing in
                        character. Abnormal visual sensations, in the form of flashes of light
                        or spots before the eyes; and rushing, buzzing, or ringing sounds in the
                        ears, are often complained of.

                        In extreme cases, phenomena which have been aptly described as those of
                        "air-hunger" ensue. On account of the small quantity of blood
                        circulating through the body, and the diminished haemoglobin content of
                        the blood, the tissues are imperfectly oxygenated, and the patient
                        becomes extremely restless, gasping for breath, constantly throwing
                        about his arms and baring his chest in the vain attempt to breath more
                        freely. Faintness and giddiness are marked features. The diminished
                        supply of oxygen to the brain and to the muscles produces muscular
                        twitchings, and sometimes convulsions. Finally the pupils dilate, the
                        sphincters relax, and death ensues.

                        Young children stand the loss of blood badly, but they quickly recover,
                        as the regeneration of blood takes place rapidly. In old people also,
                        and especially when they are fat, the loss of blood is badly borne, and
                        the ill effects last longer. Women, on the whole, stand loss of blood
                        better than men, and in them the blood is more rapidly re-formed. A few
                        hours after a severe haemorrhage there is usually a leucocytosis of from
                        15,000 to 30,000.

                        #Treatment of the Bloodless State.#--The patient should be placed in a
                        warm, well-ventilated room, and the foot of the bed elevated. Cardiac
                        stimulants, such as strychnin or alcohol, must be judiciously
                        administered, over-stimulation being avoided. The inhalation of oxygen
                        has been found useful in relieving the urgent symptoms of dyspnoea.

                        The blood may be emptied from the limbs into the vessels of the trunk,
                        where it is more needed, by holding them vertically in the air for a few
                        minutes, and then applying a firm elastic bandage over a layer of cotton
                        wool, from the periphery towards the trunk.

                        _Introduction of Fluids into the Circulation._--The most valuable
                        measure for maintaining the circulation, however, is by transfusion of
                        blood (_Op. Surg._, p. 37). If this is not immediately available the
                        introduction of from one to three pints of physiological salt
                        solution (a teaspoonful of common salt to a pint of water) into a vein,
                        or a 6 per cent. solution of gum acacia, is a useful expedient. The
                        solution is sterilised by boiling, and cooled to a temperature of about
                        105 o F. The addition of 5 to 10 minims of adrenalin solution (1 in 1000)
                        is advantageous in raising the blood-pressure (_Op. Surg._, p. 565).

                        When the intra-venous method is not available, one or two pints of
                        saline solution with adrenalin should be slowly introduced into the
                        rectum, by means of a long rubber tube and a filler. Satisfactory,
                        although less rapidly obtained results follow the introduction of saline
                        solution into the cellular tissue--for example, under the mamma, into
                        the axilla, or under the skin of the back.

                        If the patient can retain fluids taken by the mouth--such as hot coffee,
                        barley water, or soda water--these should be freely given, unless the
                        injury necessitates operative treatment under a general anaesthetic.

                        Transfusion of blood is most valuable as _a preliminary to operation_ in
                        patients who are bloodless as a result of haemorrhage from gastric and
                        duodenal ulcers, and in bleeders.


                        HAEMOPHILIA

                        The term haemophilia is applied to an inherited disease which renders the
                        patient liable to serious haemorrhage from even the most trivial
                        injuries; and the subjects of it are popularly known as "bleeders."

                        The cause of the disease and its true nature are as yet unknown. There
                        is no proof of any structural defect in the blood vessels, and beyond
                        the fact that there is a diminution in the number of blood-plates, it
                        has not been demonstrated that there is any alteration in the
                        composition of the blood.

                        The affection is in a marked degree hereditary, all the branches of an
                        affected family being liable to suffer. Its mode of transmission to
                        individuals, moreover, is characteristic: the male members of the stock
                        alone suffer from the affection in its typical form, while the tendency
                        is transmitted through the female line. Thus the daughters of a father
                        who is a bleeder, whilst they do not themselves suffer from the disease,
                        transmit the tendency to their male offspring. The sons, on the other
                        hand, neither suffer themselves nor transmit the disease to their
                        children (Fig. 64). The female members of a haemophilic stock are often
                        very prolific, and there is usually a predominance of daughters in their
                        families.

                        The disease is met with in boys who are otherwise healthy, and usually
                        manifests itself during the first few years of life. In rare instances
                        profuse haemorrhage takes place when the umbilical cord separates. As a
                        rule the first evidence is the occurrence of long-continued and
                        uncontrollable bleeding from a comparatively slight injury, such as the
                        scratch of a pin, the extraction of a tooth, or after the operation of
                        circumcision. The blood oozes slowly from the capillaries; at first it
                        appears normal, but after flowing for some days, or it may be weeks, it
                        becomes pale, thin, and watery, and shows less and less tendency to
                        coagulate.

                        Female members of haemophilia families sometimes show a tendency to
                        excessive haemorrhage, but they seldom manifest the characteristic
                        features met with in the male members.

                        Sometimes the haemorrhage takes place apparently spontaneously from the
                        gums, the nasal or the intestinal mucous membrane. In other cases the
                        bleeding occurs into the cellular tissue under the skin or mucous
                        membrane, producing large areas of ecchymosis and discoloration. One of
                        the commonest manifestations of the disease is the occurrence of
                        haemorrhage into the cavities of the large joints, especially the knee,
                        elbow, or hip. The patient suffers repeatedly from such haemorrhages, the
                        determining injury being often so slight as to have passed unobserved.

                        There is evidence that the tendency to bleed is greater at certain times
                        than at others--in some cases showing almost a cyclical
                        character--although nothing is known as to the cause of the variation.

                        After a severe haemorrhage into the cellular tissue or into a joint, the
                        patient becomes pale and anaemic, the temperature may rise to 102 o or
                        103 o F., the pulse become small and rapid, and haemic murmurs are
                        sometimes developed over the heart and large arteries. The swelling is
                        tense, fluctuating, and hot, and there is considerable pain and
                        tenderness.

                        In exceptional cases, blisters form over the seat of the effusion, or
                        the skin may even slough, and the clinical features may therefore come
                        to simulate closely those of an acute suppurative condition. When the
                        skin sloughs, an ulcer is formed with altered blood-clot in its floor
                        like that seen in scurvy, and there is a remarkable absence of any
                        attempt at healing.

                        The acute symptoms gradually subside, and the blood is slowly absorbed,
                        the discoloration of the skin passing through the same series of changes
                        as occur after an ordinary bruise. The patients seldom manifest the
                        symptoms of the bloodless state, and the blood is rapidly regenerated.

                        The _diagnosis_ is easy if the patient or his friends are aware of the
                        family tendency to haemorrhage and inform the doctor of it, but they are
                        often sensitive and reticent regarding the fact, and it may only be
                        elicited after close investigation. From the history it is usually easy
                        to exclude scurvy and purpura. Repeated haemorrhages into a joint may
                        result in appearances which closely simulate those of tuberculous
                        disease. Recent haemorrhages into the cellular tissue often present
                        clinical features closely resembling those of acute cellulitis or
                        osteomyelitis. A careful examination, however, may reveal ecchymoses on
                        other parts of the body which give a clue to the nature of the
                        condition, and may prevent the disastrous consequences that may follow
                        incision.

                        These patients usually succumb sooner or later to haemorrhage, although
                        they often survive several severe attacks. After middle life the
                        tendency to bleed appears to diminish.

                        _Treatment._--As a rule the ordinary means of arresting haemorrhage are
                        of little avail. From among the numerous means suggested, the following
                        may be mentioned: The application to the bleeding point of gauze soaked
                        in a 1 in 1000 solution of adrenalin; prolonged inhalation of oxygen;
                        freezing the part with a spray of ethyl-chloride; one or more
                        subcutaneous injections of gelatin--5 ounces of a 2 1/2 per cent.
                        solution of white gelatin in normal salt solution being injected at a
                        temperature of about 100 o F.; the injection of pituitary extract. The
                        application of a pad of gauze soaked in the blood of a normal person
                        sometimes arrests the bleeding.

                        To prevent bleeding in haemophilics, intra-venous or subcutaneous
                        injections of fresh blood serum, taken from the human subject, the
                        sheep, the dog, or the horse, have proved useful. If fresh serum is not
                        available, anti-diphtheritic or anti-tetanic serum or trade
                        preparations, such as hemoplastin, may be employed. We have removed the
                        appendix and amputated through the thigh in haemophilic subjects without
                        excessive loss of blood after a course of fresh sheep's serum given by
                        the mouth over a period of several weeks.

                        The chloride and lactate of calcium, and extract of thymus gland have
                        been employed to increase the coagulability of the blood. The patient
                        should drink large quantities of milk, which also increases the
                        coagulability of the blood. Monro has observed remarkable results from
                        the hypodermic injection of emetin hydrochloride in  1/2-grain doses.


                        THROMBOSIS AND EMBOLISM

                        The processes known as thrombosis and embolism are so intimately
                        associated with the diseases of blood vessels that it is convenient to
                        define these terms in the first instance.

                        #Thrombosis.#--The term _thrombus_ is applied to a clot of blood formed
                        in the interior of the heart or of a blood vessel, and the process by
                        which such a clot forms is known as _thrombosis_. It would appear that
                        slowing or stagnation of the blood-stream, and interference with the
                        integrity of the lining membrane of the vessel wall, are the most
                        important factors determining the formation of the clot. Alterations in
                        the blood itself, such as occur, for example, in certain toxaemias, also
                        favour coagulation. When the thrombus is formed slowly, it consists of
                        white blood cells with a small proportion of fibrin, and, being
                        deposited in successive layers, has a distinctly laminated appearance on
                        section. It is known as a _white thrombus_ or laminated clot, and is
                        often met with in the sac of an aneurysm (Fig. 72). When rapidly formed
                        in a vessel in which the blood is almost stagnant--as, for example, in a
                        pouched varicose vein--the blood coagulates _en masse_, and the clot
                        consists of all the elements of the blood, constituting a _red thrombus_
                        (Fig. 66). Sometimes the thrombus is _mixed_--a red thrombus being
                        deposited on a white one, it may be in alternate layers.

                        When aseptic, a thrombus may become detached and be carried off in the
                        blood-stream as an embolus; it may become organised; or it may
                        degenerate and undergo calcification. Occasionally a small thrombus
                        situated behind a valve in a varicose vein or in the terminal end of a
                        dilated vein--for example in a pile--undergoes calcification, and is
                        then spoken of as a _phlebolith_; it gives a shadow with the X-rays.

                        When infected with pyogenic bacteria, the thrombus becomes converted
                        into pus and a localised abscess forms; or portions of the thrombus may
                        be carried as emboli in the circulation to distant parts, where they
                        give rise to secondary foci of suppuration--pyaemic abscesses.

                        #Embolism.#--The term _embolus_ is applied to any body carried along in
                        the circulation and ultimately becoming impacted in a blood vessel. This
                        occurrence is known as _embolism_. The commonest forms of embolus are
                        portions of thrombi or of fibrinous formations on the valves of the
                        heart, the latter being usually infected with micro-organisms.

                        Embolism plays an important part in determining one form of gangrene, as
                        has already been described. Infective emboli are the direct cause of the
                        secondary abscesses that occur in pyaemia; and they are sometimes
                        responsible for the formation of aneurysm.

                        Portions of malignant tumours also may form emboli, and their impaction
                        in the vessels may lead to the development of secondary growths in
                        distant parts of the body.

                        Fat and air embolism have already been referred to.


                        ARTERITIS

                        _Pyogenic._--Non-suppurative inflammation of the coats of an artery may
                        so soften the wall of the vessel as to lead to aneurysmal dilatation. It
                        is not uncommon in children, and explains the occurrence of aneurysm in
                        young subjects.

                        When suppuration occurs, the vessel wall becomes disintegrated and gives
                        way, leading to secondary haemorrhage. If the vessel ruptures into an
                        abscess cavity, dangerous bleeding may occur when the abscess bursts or
                        is opened.

                        _Syphilitic._--The inflammation associated with syphilis results in
                        thickening of the tunica intima, whereby the lumen of the vessel becomes
                        narrowed, or even obliterated--_endarteritis obliterans_. The middle
                        coat usually escapes, but the tunica externa is generally thickened.
                        These changes cause serious interference with the nutrition of the parts
                        supplied by the affected arteries. In large trunks, by diminishing the
                        elasticity of the vessel wall, they are liable to lead to the formation
                        of aneurysm.

                        Changes in the arterial walls closely resembling those of syphilitic
                        arteritis are sometimes met with in _tuberculous_ lesions.

                        #Arterio-sclerosis# or #Chronic Arteritis#.--These terms are applied to
                        certain changes which result in narrowing of the lumen and loss of
                        elasticity in the arteries. The condition may affect the whole vascular
                        system or may be confined to particular areas. In the smaller arteries
                        there is more or less uniform thickening of the tunica intima from
                        proliferation of the endothelium and increase in the connective tissue
                        in the elastic lamina--a form of obliterative endarteritis. The
                        narrowing of the vessels may be sufficient to determine gangrene in the
                        extremities. In course of time, particularly in the larger arteries,
                        this new tissue undergoes degeneration, at first of a fatty nature, but
                        progressing in the direction of calcification, and this is followed by
                        the deposit of lime salts in the young connective tissue and the
                        formation of calcareous plates or rings over a considerable area of the
                        vessel wall. To this stage in the process the term _atheroma_ is
                        applied. The endothelium over these plates often disappears, leaving
                        them exposed to the blood-stream.

                        Changes of a similar kind sometimes occur in the middle coat, the lime
                        salts being deposited among the muscle fibres in concentric rings.

                        The primary cause of arterio-sclerosis is not definitely known, but its
                        almost constant occurrence, to a greater or less degree, in the aged
                        suggests that it is of the nature of a senile degeneration. It is
                        favoured by anything which throws excessive strain on the vessel walls,
                        such as heavy muscular work; by chronic alcoholism and syphilis; or by
                        such general diseases as tend to raise the blood-pressure--for example,
                        chronic Bright's disease or gout. It occurs with greater frequency and
                        with greater severity in men than in women.

                        Atheromatous degeneration is most common in the large arterial trunks,
                        and the changes are most marked at the arch of the aorta, opposite the
                        flexures of joints, at the mouths of large branches, and at parts where
                        the vessel lies in contact with bone. The presence of diseased patches
                        in the wall of an artery diminishes its elasticity and favours
                        aneurysmal dilatation. Such a vessel also is liable to be ruptured by
                        external violence and so give rise to traumatic aneurysm. Thrombosis is
                        liable to occur when calcareous plates are exposed in the lumen of the
                        vessel by destruction of the endothelium, and this predisposes to
                        embolism. Arterio-sclerosis also interferes with the natural arrest of
                        haemorrhage, and by rendering the vessels brittle, makes it difficult to
                        secure them by ligature. In advanced cases the accessible arteries--such
                        as the radial, the temporal or the femoral--may be felt as firm,
                        tortuous cords, which are sometimes so hard that they have been aptly
                        compared to "pipe-stems." The pulse is smaller and less compressible
                        than normal, and the vessel moves bodily with each pulsation. It must be
                        borne in mind, however, that the condition of the radial artery may fail
                        to afford a clue to that of the larger arteries. Calcified arteries are
                        readily identified in skiagrams (Fig. 65).

                        [Illustration: FIG. 65.--Radiogram showing Calcareous Degeneration
                        (Atheroma) of Arteries.]

                        We have met with a chronic form of arterial degeneration in elderly
                        women, affecting especially the great vessels at the root of the neck,
                        in which the artery is remarkably attenuated and dilated, and so friable
                        that the wall readily tears when seized with an artery-forceps,
                        rendering ligation of the vessel in the ordinary way well-nigh
                        impossible. Matas suggests infolding the wall of the vessel with
                        interrupted sutures that do not pierce the intima, and wrapping it
                        round with a strip of peritoneum or omentum.

                        The most serious form of arterial _thrombosis_ is that met with _in the
                        abdominal aorta_, which is attended with violent pains in the lower
                        limbs, rapidly followed by paralysis and arrest of the circulation.


                        THROMBO-PHLEBITIS AND THROMBOSIS IN VEINS

                        #Thrombosis# is more common in veins than in arteries, because slowing
                        of the blood-stream and irritation of the endothelium of the vessel wall
                        are, owing to the conditions of the venous circulation, more readily
                        induced in veins.

                        Venous thrombosis may occur from purely mechanical causes--as, for
                        example, when the wall of a vein is incised, or the vessel included in a
                        ligature, or when it is bruised or crushed by a fragment of a broken
                        bone or by a bandage too tightly applied. Under these conditions
                        thrombosis is essentially a reparative process, and has already been
                        considered in relation to the repair of blood vessels.

                        In other cases thrombosis is associated with certain constitutional
                        diseases--gout, for example; the endothelium of the veins undergoing
                        changes--possibly the result of irritation by abnormal constituents in
                        the blood--which favour the formation of thrombi.

                        Under these various conditions the formation of a thrombus is not
                        necessarily associated with the action of bacteria, although in any
                        of them this additional factor may be present.

                        The most common cause of venous thrombosis, however, is inflammation of
                        the wall of the vein--phlebitis.

                        #Phlebitis.#--Various forms of phlebitis are met with, but for practical
                        purposes they may be divided into two groups--one in which there is a
                        tendency to the formation of a thrombus; the other in which the
                        infective element predominates.

                        In surgical patients, the _thrombotic form_ is almost invariably met
                        with in the lower extremity, and usually occurs in those who are
                        debilitated and anaemic, and who are confined to bed for prolonged
                        periods--for example, during the treatment of fractures of the leg or
                        pelvis, or after such operations as herniotomy, prostatectomy, or
                        appendectomy.

                        _Clinical Features._--The most typical example of this form of phlebitis
                        is that so frequently met with in the great saphena vein, especially
                        when it is varicose. The onset of the attack is indicated by a sudden
                        pain in the lower limb--sometimes below, sometimes above the knee. This
                        initial pain may be associated with shivering or even with a rigor, and
                        the temperature usually rises one or two degrees. There is swelling and
                        tenderness along the line of the affected vein, and the skin over it is
                        a dull-red or purple colour. The swollen vein may be felt as a firm
                        cord, with bead-like enlargements in the position of the valves. The
                        patient experiences a feeling of stiffness and tightness throughout the
                        limb. There is often oedema of the leg and foot, especially when the limb
                        is in the dependent position. The acute symptoms pass off in a few days,
                        but the swelling and tenderness of the vein and the oedema of the limb
                        may last for many weeks.

                        When the deep veins--iliac, femoral, popliteal--are involved, there is
                        great swelling of the whole limb, which is of a firm almost "wooden"
                        consistence, and of a pale-white colour; the oedema may be so great that
                        it is impossible to feel the affected vein until the swelling has
                        subsided. This is most often seen in puerperal women, and is known as
                        _phlegmasia alba dolens_.

                        _Treatment._--The patient must be placed at absolute rest, with the foot
                        of the bed raised on blocks 10 or 12 inches high, and the limb
                        immobilised by sand-bags or splints. It is necessary to avoid handling
                        the parts, lest the clot be displaced and embolism occur. To avoid
                        frequent movement of the limb, the necessary dressings should be kept in
                        position by means of a many-tailed rather than a roller bandage.

                        To relieve the pain, warm fomentations or lead and opium lotion should
                        be applied. Later, ichthyol-glycerin, or glycerin and belladonna, may be
                        substituted.

                        When, at the end of three weeks, the danger of embolism is past,
                        douching and gentle massage may be employed to disperse the oedema; and
                        when the patient gets up he should wear a supporting elastic bandage.

                        The _infective_ form usually begins as a peri-phlebitis arising in
                        connection with some focus of infection in the adjacent tissues. The
                        elements of the vessel wall are destroyed by suppuration, and the
                        thrombus in its lumen becomes infected with pyogenic bacteria and
                        undergoes softening.

                        _Occlusion of the inferior vena cava_ as a result of infective
                        thrombosis is a well-known condition, the thrombosis extending into the
                        main trunk from some of its tributaries, either from the femoral or
                        iliac veins below or from the hepatic veins above.

                        Portions of the softened thrombus are liable to become detached and to
                        enter the circulating blood, in which they are carried as emboli. These
                        may lodge in distant parts, and give rise to secondary foci of
                        suppuration--pyaemic abscesses.

                        _Clinical Features._--Infective phlebitis is most frequently met with in
                        the transverse sinus as a sequel to chronic suppuration in the mastoid
                        antrum and middle ear. It also occurs in relation to the peripheral
                        veins, but in these it can seldom be recognised as a separate entity,
                        being merged in the general infective process from which it takes
                        origin. Its occurrence may be inferred, if in the course of a
                        suppurative lesion there is a sudden rise of temperature, with pain,
                        redness, and swelling along the line of a venous trunk, and a rapidly
                        developed oedema of the limb, with pitting of the skin on pressure. In
                        rare cases a localised abscess forms in the vein and points towards the
                        surface.

                        _Treatment._--Attention must be directed towards the condition with
                        which the phlebitis is associated. Ligation of the vein on the cardiac
                        side of the thrombus with a view to preventing embolism is seldom
                        feasible in the peripheral veins, although, as will be pointed out
                        later, the jugular vein is ligated with this object in cases of
                        phlebitis of the transverse sinus.


                        VARIX--VARICOSE VEINS

                        The term varix is applied to a condition in which veins are so altered
                        in structure that they remain permanently dilated, and are at the same
                        time lengthened and tortuous. Two types are met with: one in which
                        dilatation of a large superficial vein and its tributaries is the most
                        obvious feature; the other, in which bunches of distended and tortuous
                        vessels develop at one or more points in the course of a vein, a
                        condition to which Virchow applied the term _angioma racemosum venosum_.
                        The two types may occur in combination.

                        Any vein in the body may become varicose, but the condition is rare
                        except in the veins of the lower extremity, in the veins of the
                        spermatic cord (varicocele), and in the veins of the anal canal
                        (haemorrhoids).

                        We are here concerned with varix as it occurs in the veins of the lower
                        extremity.

                        _Etiology._--Considerable difference of opinion exists as to the
                        essential cause of varix. The weight of evidence is in favour of the
                        view that, when dilatation is the predominant element, it results from a
                        congenital deficiency in the number, size, and strength of the valves of
                        the affected veins, and in an inherent weakness in the vessel walls.
                        The _angioma racemosum venosum_ is probably also due to a congenital
                        alteration in the structure of the vessels, and is allied to tumours of
                        blood vessels. The view that varix is congenital in origin, as was first
                        suggested by Virchow, is supported by the fact that in a large
                        proportion of cases the condition is hereditary; not only may several
                        members of the same family in succeeding generations suffer from varix,
                        but it is often found that the same vein, or segment of a vein, is
                        involved in all of them. The frequent occurrence of varix in youth is
                        also an indication of its congenital origin.

                        In the majority of cases it is only when some exciting factor comes into
                        operation that the clinical phenomena associated with varix appear. The
                        most common exciting cause is increased pressure within the veins, and
                        this may be produced in a variety of ways. In certain diseases of the
                        heart, lungs, and liver, for example, the venous pressure may be so
                        raised as to cause a localised dilatation of such veins as are
                        congenitally weak. The direct pressure of a tumour, or of the gravid
                        uterus on the large venous trunks in the pelvis, may so obstruct the
                        flow as to distend the veins of the lower extremity. It is a common
                        experience in women that the signs of varix date from an antecedent
                        pregnancy. The importance of the wearing of tight garters as a factor in
                        the production of varicose veins has been exaggerated, although it must
                        be admitted that this practice is calculated to aggravate the condition
                        when it is once established. It has been proved experimentally that the
                        backward pressure in the veins may be greatly increased by straining, a
                        fact which helps to explain the frequency with which varicosity occurs
                        in the lower limbs of athletes and of those whose occupation involves
                        repeated and violent muscular efforts. There is reason to believe,
                        moreover, that a sudden strain may, by rupturing the valves and so
                        rendering them incompetent, induce varicosity independently of any
                        congenital defect. Prolonged standing or walking, by allowing gravity to
                        act on the column of blood in the veins of the lower limbs, is also an
                        important determining factor in the production of varix.

                        Thrombosis of the deep veins--in the leg, for example--may induce marked
                        dilatation of the superficial veins, by throwing an increased amount of
                        work upon them. This is to be looked upon rather as a compensatory
                        hypertrophy of the superficial vessels than as a true varix.

                        _Morbid Anatomy._--In the lower extremity the varicosity most commonly
                        affects the vessels of the great saphena system; less frequently those
                        of the small saphena system. Sometimes both systems are involved, and
                        large communicating branches may develop between the two.

                        The essential lesion is the absence or deficiency of valves, so that
                        they are incompetent and fail to support the column of blood which bears
                        back upon them. Normally the valves in the femoral and iliac veins and
                        in the inferior vena cava are imperfectly developed, so that in the
                        erect posture the great saphena receives a large share of the backward
                        pressure of the column of venous blood.

                        The whole length of the vein may be affected, but as a rule the disease
                        is confined to one or more segments, which are not only dilated, but are
                        also increased in length, so that they become convoluted. The adjacent
                        loops of the convoluted vein are often bound together by fibrous tissue.
                        All the coats are thickened, chiefly by an increased development of
                        connective tissue, and in some cases changes similar to those of
                        arterio-sclerosis occur. The walls of varicose veins are often
                        exceedingly brittle. In some cases the thickening is uniform, and in
                        others it is irregular, so that here and there thin-walled sacs or
                        pouches project from the side of the vein. These pouches vary in size
                        from a bean to a hen's egg, the larger forms being called _venous
                        cysts_, and being most commonly met with in the region of the saphenous
                        opening and of the opening in the popliteal fascia. Such pouches, being
                        exposed to injury, are frequently the seat of thrombosis (Fig. 66).

                        [Illustration: FIG. 66.--Thrombosis in Tortuous and Pouched Great
                        Saphena Vein, in longitudinal section.]

                        _Clinical Features._--Varix is most frequently met with between puberty
                        and the age of thirty, and the sexes appear to suffer about equally.

                        The amount of discomfort bears no direct proportion to the extent of
                        the varicosity. It depends rather upon the degree of pressure in the
                        veins, as is shown by the fact that it is relieved by elevation of the
                        limb. When the whole length of the main trunk of the great saphena is
                        implicated, the pressure in the vein is high and the patient suffers a
                        good deal of pain and discomfort. When, on the contrary, the upper part
                        of the saphena and its valves are intact, and only the more distal veins
                        are involved, the pressure is not so high and there is comparatively
                        little suffering. The usual complaint is of a sense of weight and
                        fulness in the limb after standing or walking, sometimes accompanied by
                        actual pain, from which relief is at once obtained by raising the limb.
                        Cramp-like pains in the muscles are often associated with varix of the
                        deep veins.

                        The dilated and tortuous vein can be readily seen and felt when the
                        patient is examined in the upright posture. In advanced cases, bead-like
                        swellings are sometimes to be detected over the position of the valves,
                        and, on running the fingers along the course of the vessel, a firm
                        ridge, due to periphlebitis, may be detected on each side of the vein.
                        When the limb is oedematous, the outline of the veins is obscured, but
                        they can be identified on palpation as gutter-like tracks. When large
                        veins are implicated, a distinct impulse on coughing may be seen to pass
                        down as far as the knee; and if the vessel is sharply percussed a fluid
                        wave may be detected passing both up and down the vein.

                        If the patient is placed on a couch and the limb elevated, the veins are
                        emptied, and if pressure is then made over the region of the saphenous
                        opening and the patient allowed to stand up, so long as the great
                        saphena system alone is involved, the veins fill again very slowly from
                        below. If the small saphena system also is involved, and if
                        communicating branches are dilated, the veins fill up from below more
                        rapidly. When the pressure over the saphenous opening is removed, the
                        blood rapidly rushes into the varicose vessels from above; this is known
                        as Trendelenburg's test.

                        The most marked dilatation usually occurs on the medial side of the
                        limb, between the middle of the thigh and the middle of the calf, the
                        arrangement of the veins showing great variety (Fig. 67).

                        There are usually one or more bunches of enlarged and tortuous veins in
                        the region of the knee. Frequently a large branch establishes a
                        communication between the systems of the great and small saphenous veins
                        in the region of the popliteal space, or across the front of the upper
                        part of the tibia. The superficial position of this last branch and its
                        proximity to the bone render it liable to injury.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 67.--Extensive Varix of Internal Saphena System on
                        Left Leg, of many years' standing.]

                        The small veins of the skin of the ankle and foot often show as fine
                        blue streaks arranged in a stellate or arborescent manner, especially in
                        women who have borne children.

                        _Complications._--When the varix is of long standing, the skin in the
                        lower part of the leg sometimes assumes a mahogany-brown or bluish hue,
                        as a result of the _deposit of blood pigment_ in the tissues, and this
                        is frequently a precursor of ulceration.

                        _Chronic dermatitis_ (_varicose eczema_) is often met with in the lower
                        part of the leg, and is due to interference with the nutrition of the
                        skin. The incompetence of the valves allows the pressure in the varicose
                        veins to equal that in the arterioles, so that the capillary circulation
                        is impeded. From the same cause the blood in the deep veins is enabled
                        to enter the superficial veins, where the backward pressure is so great
                        that the blood flows down again, and so a vicious circle is established.
                        The blood therefore loses more and more of its oxygen, and so fails to
                        nourish the tissues.

                        The _ulcer_ of the leg associated with varicose veins has already been
                        described.

                        _Haemorrhage_ may take place from a varicose vein as a result of a wound
                        or of ulceration of its wall. Increased intra-venous pressure produced
                        by severe muscular strain may determine rupture of a vein exposed in the
                        floor of an ulcer. If the limb is dependent, the incompetency of the
                        valves permits of rapid and copious bleeding, which may prove fatal,
                        particularly if the patient is intoxicated when the rupture takes place
                        and no means are taken to arrest the haemorrhage. The bleeding may be
                        arrested at once by elevating the limb, or by applying pressure directly
                        over the bleeding point.

                        _Phlebitis and thrombosis_ are common sequelae of varix, and may prove
                        dangerous, either by spreading into the large venous trunks or by giving
                        rise to emboli. The larger the varix the greater is the tendency for a
                        thrombus to spread upwards and to involve the deep veins. Thrombi
                        usually originate in venous cysts or pouches, and at acute bends on the
                        vessel, especially when these are situated in the vicinity of the knee,
                        and are subjected to repeated injuries--for example in riding.
                        Phleboliths sometimes form in such pouches, and may be recognised in a
                        radiogram. In a certain proportion of cases, especially in elderly
                        people, the occurrence of thrombosis leads to cure of the condition by
                        the thrombus becoming organised and obliterating the vein.

                        _Treatment._--At best the treatment of varicose veins is only
                        palliative, as it is obviously impossible to restore to the vessels
                        their normal structure. The patient must avoid wearing anything, such as
                        a garter, which constricts the limb, and any obvious cause of direct
                        pressure on the pelvic veins, such as a tumour, persistent
                        constipation, or an ill-fitting truss, should be removed. Cardiac,
                        renal, or pulmonary causes of venous congestion must also be treated,
                        and the functions of the liver regulated. Severe forms of muscular
                        exertion and prolonged standing or walking are to be avoided, and the
                        patient may with benefit rest the limb in an elevated position for a few
                        hours each day. To support the distended vessels, a closely woven silk
                        or worsted stocking, or a light and porous form of elastic bandage,
                        applied as a puttee, should be worn. These appliances should be put on
                        before the patient leaves his bed in the morning, and should only be
                        removed after he lies down at night. In this way the vessels are never
                        allowed to become dilated. Elastic stockings, and bandages made entirely
                        of india-rubber, are to be avoided. In early and mild cases these
                        measures are usually sufficient to relieve the patient's discomfort.

                        _Operative Treatment._--In aggravated cases, when the patient is
                        suffering pain, when his occupation is interfered with by repeated
                        attacks of phlebitis, or when there are large pouches on the veins,
                        operative treatment is called for. The younger the patient the clearer
                        is the indication to operate. It may be necessary to operate to enable a
                        patient to enter one of the public services, even although no symptoms
                        are present. The presence of an ulcer does not contra-indicate
                        operation; the ulcer should be excised, and the raw surface covered with
                        skin grafts, before dealing with the veins.

                        The _operation of Trendelenburg_ is especially appropriate to cases in
                        which the trunk of the great saphena vein in the thigh is alone
                        involved. It consists in exposing three or four inches of the vein in
                        its upper part, applying a ligature at the upper and lower ends of the
                        exposed portion, and, after tying all tributary branches, resecting this
                        portion of the vein.

                        The procedure of C. H. Mayo is adapted to cases in which it is desirable
                        to remove longer segments of the veins. It consists in the employment of
                        special instruments known as "ring-enucleators" or "vein-strippers," by
                        means of which long portions of the vein are removed through
                        comparatively small incisions.

                        An alternative procedure consists in avulsing segments of the vein by
                        means of Babcock's stylet, which consists of a flexible steel rod, 30
                        inches in length, with acorn-shaped terminals. The instrument is passed
                        along the lumen of the segment to be dealt with, and a ligature applied
                        around the vein above the bulbous end of the stylet enables nearly the
                        whole length of the great saphena vein to be dragged out in one piece.
                        These methods are not suitable when the veins are brittle, when there
                        are pouches or calcareous deposits in their walls, or where there has
                        been periphlebitis binding the coils together.

                        Mitchell of Belfast advises exposing the varices at numerous points by
                        half-inch incisions, and, after clamping the vein between two pairs of
                        forceps, cutting it across and twisting out the segments of the vein
                        between adjacent incisions. The edges of the incisions are sutured; and
                        the limb is firmly bandaged from below upwards, and kept in an elevated
                        position. We have employed this method with satisfactory results.

                        The treatment of the complications of varix has already been considered.


                        ANGIOMA[4]

                        [4] In the description of angiomas we have followed the teaching of the
                        late John Duncan.

                        Tumours of blood vessels may be divided, according to the nature of the
                        vessels of which they are composed, into the capillary, the venous, and
                        the arterial angiomas.


                        CAPILLARY ANGIOMA

                        The most common form of capillary angioma is the naevus or congenital
                        telangiectasis.

                        #Naevus.#--A naevus is a collection of dilated capillaries, the afferent
                        arterioles and the efferent venules of which often share in the
                        dilatation. Little is known regarding the _etiology_ of naevi beyond the
                        fact that they are of congenital origin. They often escape notice until
                        the child is some days old, but attention is usually drawn to them
                        within a fortnight of birth. For practical purposes the most useful
                        classification of naevi is into the cutaneous, the subcutaneous, and the
                        mixed forms.

                        _The cutaneous naevus_, "mother's mark," or "port-wine stain," consists
                        of an aggregation of dilated capillaries in the substance of the skin.
                        On stretching the skin the vessels can be seen to form a fine network,
                        or to run in leashes parallel to one another. A dilated arteriole or a
                        vein winding about among the capillaries may sometimes be detected.
                        These naevi occur on any part of the body, but they are most frequently
                        met with on the face. They may be multiple, and vary greatly in size,
                        some being no bigger than a pin-head, while others cover large areas of
                        the body. In colour they present every tint from purple to brilliant
                        red; in the majority there is a considerable dash of blue, especially in
                        cold weather.

                        Unlike the other forms of naevi, the cutaneous variety shows little
                        tendency to disappear, and it is especially persistent when associated
                        with overgrowth of the epidermis and of the hairs--_naevoid mole_.

                        The _treatment_ of the cutaneous naevus is unsatisfactory, owing to the
                        difficulty of removing the naevus without leaving a scar which is even
                        more disfiguring. Very small naevi may be destroyed by a fine pointed
                        Paquelin thermo-cautery, or by escharotics, such as nitric acid. For
                        larger naevi, radium and solidified carbon dioxide ("CO_2 snow") may be
                        used. The extensive port-wine stains so often met with on the face are
                        best left alone.

                        The _subcutaneous naevus_ is comparatively rare. It constitutes a
                        well-defined, localised tumour, which may possess a distinct capsule,
                        especially when it has ceased to grow or is retrogressing. On section,
                        it presents the appearance of a finely reticulated sponge.

                        Although it may be noticed at, or within a few days of, birth, a
                        subcutaneous naevus is often overlooked, especially when on a covered
                        part of the body, and may not be discovered till the patient is some
                        years old. It forms a rounded, lobulated swelling, seldom of large size
                        and yielding a sensation like that of a sponge; the skin over it is
                        normal, or may exhibit a bluish tinge, especially in cold weather. In
                        some cases the tumour is diminished by pressing the blood out of it, but
                        slowly fills again when the pressure is relaxed, and it swells up when
                        the child struggles or cries. From a cold abscess it is diagnosed by the
                        history and progress of the swelling and by the absence of fluctuation.
                        When situated over one of the hernial openings, it closely simulates a
                        hernia; and when it occurs in the middle line of the face, head, or
                        back, it may be mistaken for such other congenital conditions as
                        meningocele or spina bifida. When other means fail, the use of an
                        exploring needle clears up the diagnosis.

                        _Mixed Naevus._--As its name indicates, the mixed naevus partakes of the
                        characters of the other two varieties; that is, it is a subcutaneous
                        naevus with involvement of the skin.

                        It is frequently met with on the face and head, but may occur on any
                        part of the body. It also affects parts covered by mucous membrane, such
                        as the cheek, tongue, and soft palate. The swelling is rounded or
                        lobulated, and projects beyond the level of its surroundings. Sometimes
                        the skin is invaded by the naevoid tissue over the whole extent of the
                        tumour, sometimes only over a limited area. Frequently the margin only
                        is of a bright-red colour, while the skin in the centre resembles a
                        cicatrix. The swelling is reduced by steady pressure, and increases in
                        size and becomes tense when the child cries.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 68.--Mixed Naevus of Nose which was subsequently
                        cured by Electrolysis.]

                        _Prognosis._--The rate of growth of the subcutaneous and mixed forms of
                        naevi varies greatly. They sometimes increase rapidly, especially during
                        the first few months of life; after this they usually grow at the same
                        rate as the child, or more slowly. There is a decided tendency to
                        disappearance of these varieties, fully 50 per cent. undergoing natural
                        cure by a process of obliteration, similar to the obliteration of
                        vessels in cicatricial tissue. This usually begins about the period of
                        the first dentition, sometimes at the second dentition, and sometimes at
                        puberty. On the other hand, an increased activity of growth may be shown
                        at these periods. The onset of natural cure is recognised by the tumour
                        becoming firmer and less compressible, and, in the mixed variety, by the
                        colour becoming less bright. Injury, infection, or ulceration of the
                        overlying skin may initiate the curative process.

                        Towards adult life the spaces in a subcutaneous naevus may become greatly
                        enlarged, leading to the formation of a cavernous angioma.

                        _Treatment._--In view of the frequency with which subcutaneous and mixed
                        naevi disappear spontaneously, interference is only called for when the
                        growth of the tumour is out of proportion to that of the child, or when,
                        from its situation--for example in the vicinity of the eye--any marked
                        increase in its size would render it less amenable to treatment.

                        The methods of treatment most generally applicable are the use of radium
                        and carbon dioxide snow, igni-puncture, electrolysis, and excision.

                        For naevi situated on exposed parts, where it is desirable to avoid a
                        scar, the use of _radium_ is to be preferred. The tube of radium is
                        applied at intervals to different parts of the naevus, the duration and
                        frequency of the applications varying with the strength of the
                        emanations and the reaction produced. The object aimed at is to induce
                        obliteration of the naevoid tissue by cicatricial contraction without
                        destroying the overlying skin. _Carbon-dioxide snow_ may be employed in
                        the same manner, but the results are inferior to those obtained by
                        radium.

                        _Igni-puncture_ consists in making a number of punctures at different
                        parts of the naevus with a fine-pointed thermo-cautery, with the object
                        of starting at each point a process of cicatrisation which extends
                        throughout the naevoid tissue and so obliterates the vessels.

                        _Electrolysis_ acts by decomposing the blood and tissues into their
                        constituent elements--oxygen and acids appearing at the positive,
                        hydrogen and bases at the negative electrode. These substances and gases
                        being given off in a nascent condition, at once enter into new
                        combinations with anything in the vicinity with which they have a
                        chemical affinity. In the naevus the practical result of this reaction is
                        that at the positive pole nitric acid, and at the negative pole caustic
                        potash, both in a state of minute subdivision, make their appearance.
                        The effect on the tissues around the positive pole, therefore, is
                        equivalent to that of an acid cauterisation, and on those round the
                        negative pole, to an alkaline cauterisation.

                        As the process is painful, a general anaesthetic is necessary. The
                        current used should be from 20 to 80 milliamperes, gradually increasing
                        from zero, without shock; three to six large Bunsen cells give a
                        sufficient current, and no galvanometer is required. Steel needles,
                        insulated with vulcanite to within an eighth of an inch of their points,
                        are the best. Both poles are introduced into the naevus, the positive
                        being kept fixed at one spot, while the negative is moved about so as to
                        produce a number of different tracks of cauterisation. On no account
                        must either pole be allowed to come in contact with the skin, lest a
                        slough be formed. The duration of the sitting is determined by the
                        effect produced, as indicated by the hardening of the tumour, the
                        average duration being from fifteen to twenty minutes. If pallor of the
                        skin appears, it indicates that the needles are too near the surface, or
                        that the blood supply to the integument is being cut off, and is an
                        indication to stop. To cauterise the track and so prevent bleeding, the
                        needles should be slowly withdrawn while the current is flowing. When
                        the skin is reached the current is turned off. The punctures are covered
                        with collodion. Six or eight weeks should be allowed to elapse before
                        repeating the procedure. From two to eight or ten sittings may be
                        necessary, according to the size and character of the naevus.

                        _Excision_ is to be preferred for naevi of moderate size situated on
                        covered parts of the body, where a scar is of no importance. Its chief
                        advantages over electrolysis are that a single operation is sufficient,
                        and that the cure is speedy and certain. The operation is attended with
                        much less haemorrhage than might be expected.

                        #Cavernous Angioma.#--This form of angioma consists of a series of large
                        blood spaces which are usually derived from the dilatation of the
                        capillaries of a subcutaneous naevus. The spaces come to communicate
                        freely with one another by the disappearance of adjacent capillary
                        walls. While the most common situation is in the subcutaneous tissue, a
                        cavernous angioma is sometimes met with in internal organs. It may
                        appear at any age from early youth to middle life, and is of slow growth
                        and may become stationary. The swelling is rounded or oval, there is no
                        pulsation or bruit, and the tumour is but slightly compressible. The
                        treatment consists in dissecting it out.

                        #Aneurysm by Anastomosis# is the name applied to a vascular tumour in
                        which the arteries, veins, and capillaries are all involved. It is met
                        with chiefly on the upper part of the trunk, the neck, and the scalp. It
                        tends gradually to increase in size, and may, after many years, attain
                        an enormous size. The tumour is ill-defined, and varies in consistence.
                        It is pulsatile, and a systolic bruit or a "thrilling" murmur may be
                        heard over it. The chief risk is haemorrhage from injury or ulceration.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 69.--Cirsoid Aneurysm of Forehead in a boy aet. 10.

                        (Mr. J. W. Dowden's case.)]

                        The _treatment_ is conducted on the same lines as for naevus. When
                        electrolysis is employed, it should be directed towards the afferent
                        vessels; and if it fails to arrest the flow through these, it is useless
                        to persist with it. In some cases ligation of the afferent vessels has
                        been successful.

                        #Arterial Angioma# or #Cirsoid Aneurysm#.--This is composed of the
                        enlarged branches of an arterial trunk. It originates in the smaller
                        branches of an artery--usually the temporal--and may spread to the main
                        trunk, and may even involve branches of other trunks with which the
                        affected artery anastomoses.

                        The condition is probably congenital in origin, though its appearance is
                        frequently preceded by an injury. It almost invariably occurs in the
                        scalp, and is usually met with in adolescent young adults.

                        The affected vessels slowly increase in size, and become tortuous, with
                        narrowings and dilatations here and there. Grooves and gutters are
                        frequently found in the bone underlying the dilated vessels.

                        There is a constant loud bruit in the tumour, which greatly troubles the
                        patient and may interfere with sleep. There is no tendency either to
                        natural cure or to rupture, but severe and even fatal haemorrhage may
                        follow a wound of the dilated vessels.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 70.--Cirsoid Aneurysm of Orbit and Face, which
                        developed after a blow on the Orbit with a cricket ball.

                        (From a photograph lent by Sir Montagu Cotterill.)]

                        The condition may be treated by excision or by electrolysis. In excision
                        the haemorrhage is controlled by an elastic tourniquet applied
                        horizontally round the head, or by ligation of the feeding trunks. In
                        large tumours the bleeding is formidable. In many cases electrolysis is
                        to be preferred, and is performed in the same way as for naevus. The
                        positive pole is placed in the centre of the tumour, while the negative
                        is introduced into the main affluents one after another.


                        ANEURYSM

                        An aneurysm is a sac communicating with an artery, and containing fluid
                        or coagulated blood.

                        Two types are met with--the pathological and the traumatic. It is
                        convenient to describe in this section also certain conditions in which
                        there is an abnormal communication between an artery and a
                        vein--arterio-venous aneurysm.


                        PATHOLOGICAL ANEURYSM

                        In this class are included such dilatations as result from weakening of
                        the arterial coats, combined, in most cases, with a loss of elasticity
                        in the walls and increase in the arterial tension due to
                        arterio-sclerosis. In some cases the vessel wall is softened by
                        arteritis--especially the embolic form--so that it yields before the
                        pressure of the blood.

                        Repeated and sudden raising of the arterial tension, as a result, for
                        example, of violent muscular efforts or of excessive indulgence in
                        alcohol, plays an important part in the causation of aneurysm. These
                        factors probably explain the comparative frequency of aneurysm in those
                        who follow such arduous occupations as soldiers, sailors,
                        dock-labourers, and navvies. In these classes the condition usually
                        manifests itself between the ages of thirty and fifty--that is, when the
                        vessels are beginning to degenerate, although the heart is still
                        vigorous and the men are hard at work. The comparative immunity of women
                        may also be explained by the less severe muscular strain involved by
                        their occupations and recreations.

                        Syphilis plays an important part in the production of aneurysm, probably
                        by predisposing the patient to arterio-sclerosis and atheroma, and
                        inducing an increase in the vascular tension in the peripheral vessels,
                        from loss of elasticity of the vessel wall and narrowing of the lumen as
                        a result of syphilitic arteritis. It is a striking fact that aneurysm is
                        seldom met with in women who have not suffered from syphilis.

                        #Varieties--Fusiform Aneurysm.#--When the _whole circumference_ of an
                        artery has been weakened, the tension of the blood causes the walls to
                        dilate uniformly, so that a fusiform or tubular aneurysm results. All
                        the coats of the vessel are stretched and form the sac of the aneurysm,
                        and the affected portion is not only dilated but is also increased in
                        length. This form is chiefly met with in the arch of the aorta, but may
                        occur in any of the main arterial trunks. As the sac of the aneurysm
                        includes all three coats, and as the inner and outer coats are usually
                        thickened by the deposit in them of connective tissue, this variety
                        increases in size slowly and seldom gives rise to urgent symptoms.

                        As a rule a fusiform aneurysm contains fluid blood, but when the intima
                        is roughened by disease, especially in the form of calcareous plates,
                        shreds of clot may adhere to it.

                        It has little tendency to natural cure, although this is occasionally
                        effected by the emerging artery becoming occluded by a clot; it has also
                        little tendency to rupture.

                        #Sacculated Aneurysm.#--When a _limited area_ of the vessel wall is
                        weakened--for example by atheroma or by other form of arteritis--this
                        portion yields before the pressure of the blood, and a sacculated
                        aneurysm results. The internal and middle coats being already damaged,
                        or, it may be, destroyed, by the primary disease, the stress falls on
                        the external coat, which in the majority of cases constitutes the sac.
                        To withstand the pressure the external coat becomes thickened, and as
                        the aneurysm increases in size it forms adhesions to surrounding
                        tissues, so that fasciae, tendons, nerves, and other structures may be
                        found matted together in its wall. The wall is further strengthened by
                        the deposit on its inner aspect of blood-clot, which may eventually
                        become organised.

                        The contents of the sac consist of fluid blood and a varying amount of
                        clot which is deposited in concentric layers on the inner aspect of the
                        sac, where it forms a pale, striated, firm mass, which constitutes a
                        laminated clot. Near the blood-current the clot is soft, red, and
                        friable (Fig. 72). The laminated clot not only strengthens the sac,
                        enabling it to resist the blood-pressure and so prevent rupture, but, if
                        it increases sufficiently to fill the cavity, may bring about cure. The
                        principle upon which all methods of treatment are based is to imitate
                        nature in producing such a clot.

                        Sacculated aneurysm, as compared with the fusiform variety, tends to
                        rupture and also to cure by the formation of laminated clot; natural
                        cure is sometimes all but complete when extension and rupture occur and
                        cause death.

                        An aneurysm is said to be _diffused_ when the sac ruptures and the blood
                        escapes into the cellular tissue.

                        #Clinical Features of Aneurysm.#--Surgically, the sacculated is by far
                        the most important variety. The outstanding feature is the existence in
                        the line of an artery of a globular swelling, which pulsates. The
                        pulsation is of an expansile character, which is detected by observing
                        that when both hands are placed over the swelling they are separated
                        with each beat of the heart. If the main artery be compressed on the
                        cardiac side of the swelling, the pulsation is arrested and the tumour
                        becomes smaller and less tense, and it may be still further reduced in
                        size by gentle pressure being made over it so as to empty it of fluid
                        blood. On allowing the blood again to flow through the artery, the
                        pulsation returns at once, but several beats are required before the sac
                        regains its former size. In most cases a distinct thrill is felt on
                        placing the hand over the swelling, and a blowing, systolic murmur may
                        be heard with the stethoscope. It is to be borne in mind that
                        occasionally, when the interchange of blood between an aneurysm and the
                        artery from which it arises is small, pulsation and bruit may be slight
                        or even absent. This is also the case when the sac contains a
                        considerable quantity of clot. When it becomes filled with
                        clot--_consolidated aneurysm_--these signs disappear, and the clinical
                        features are those of a solid tumour lying in contact with an artery,
                        and transmitting its pulsation.

                        A comparison of the pulse in the artery beyond the seat of the aneurysm
                        with that in the corresponding artery on the healthy side, shows that on
                        the affected side the wave is smaller in volume, and delayed in time. A
                        pulse tracing shows that the normal impulse and dicrotic waves are lost,
                        and that the force and rapidity of the tidal wave are diminished.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 71.--Radiogram of Aneurysm of Aorta, showing
                        laminated clot and erosion of bodies of vertebrae. The intervertebral
                        discs are intact.]

                        An aneurysm exerts pressure on the surrounding structures, which are
                        usually thickened and adherent to it and to one another. Adjacent veins
                        may be so compressed that congestion and oedema of the parts beyond are
                        produced. Pain, disturbances of sensation, and muscular paralyses may
                        result from pressure on nerves. Such bones as the sternum and vertebrae
                        undergo erosion and are absorbed by the gradually increasing pressure of
                        the aneurysm. Cartilage, on the other hand, being elastic, yields before
                        the pressure, so that the intervertebral discs or the costal cartilages
                        may escape while the adjacent bones are destroyed (Fig. 71). The skin
                        over the tumour becomes thinned and stretched, until finally a slough
                        forms, and when it separates haemorrhage takes place.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 72.--Sacculated Aneurysm of Abdominal Aorta nearly
                        filled with laminated clot. Note greater density of clot towards
                        periphery.]

                        In the progress of an aneurysm towards rupture, timely clotting may
                        avert death for the moment, but while extension in one direction has
                        been arrested there is apt to be extension in another, with imminence of
                        rupture, or it may be again postponed.

                        #Differential Diagnosis.#--The diagnosis is to be made from other
                        pulsatile swellings. Pulsation is sometimes transmitted from a large
                        artery to a tumour, a mass of enlarged lymph glands, or an inflammatory
                        swelling which lies in its vicinity, but the pulsation is not
                        expansile--a most important point in differential diagnosis. Such
                        swellings may, by appropriate manipulation, be moved from the artery and
                        the pulsation ceases, and compression of the artery on the cardiac side
                        of the swelling, although it arrests the pulsation, does not produce any
                        diminution in the size or tension of the swelling, and when the pressure
                        is removed the pulsation is restored immediately.

                        Fluid swellings overlying an artery, such as cysts, abscesses, or
                        enlarged bursae, may closely simulate aneurysm. An apparent expansion may
                        accompany the pulsation, but careful examination usually enables this to
                        be distinguished from the true expansion of an aneurysm. Compression of
                        the artery makes no difference in the size or tension of the swelling.

                        Vascular tumours, such as sarcoma and goitre, may yield an expansile
                        pulsation and a soft, whifling bruit, but they differ from an aneurysm
                        in that they are not diminished in size by compression of the main
                        artery, nor can they be emptied by pressure.

                        The exaggerated pulsation sometimes observed in the abdominal aorta, the
                        "pulsating aorta" seen in women, should not be mistaken for aneurysm.

                        #Prognosis.#--When _natural cure_ occurs it is usually brought about by
                        the formation of laminated clot, which gradually increases in amount
                        till it fills the sac. Sometimes a portion of the clot in the sac is
                        separated and becomes impacted as an embolus in the artery beyond,
                        leading to thrombosis which first occludes the artery and then extends
                        into the sac.

                        The progress of natural cure is indicated by the aneurysm becoming
                        smaller, firmer, less expansile, and less compressible; the murmur and
                        thrill diminish and the pressure effects become less marked. When the
                        cure is complete the expansile pulsation is lost, and there remains a
                        firm swelling attached to the vessel (_consolidated aneurysm_). While
                        these changes are taking place the collateral arteries become enlarged,
                        and an anastomotic circulation is established.

                        An aneurysm may prove _fatal_ by exerting pressure on important
                        structures, by causing syncope, by rupture, or from the occurrence of
                        suppuration. _Pressure_ symptoms are usually most serious from aneurysms
                        situated in the neck, thorax, or skull. Sudden fatal _syncope_ is not
                        infrequent in cases of aneurysm of the thoracic aorta.

                        _Rupture_ may take place through the skin, on a mucous or serous
                        surface, or into the cellular tissue. The first haemorrhage is often
                        slight and stops naturally, but it soon recurs, and is so profuse,
                        especially when the blood escapes externally, that it rapidly proves
                        fatal. When the bleeding takes place into the cellular tissue, the
                        aneurysm is said to become _diffused_, and the extravasated blood
                        spreads widely through the tissues, exerting great pressure on the
                        surrounding structures.

                        The _clinical features_ associated with rupture are sudden and severe
                        pain in the part, and the patient becomes pale, cold, and faint. If a
                        comparatively small escape of blood takes place into the tissues, the
                        sudden alteration in the size, shape, and tension of the aneurysm,
                        together with loss of pulsation, may be the only local signs. When the
                        bleeding is profuse, however, the parts beyond the aneurysm become
                        greatly swollen, livid, and cold, and the pulse beyond is completely
                        lost. The arrest of the blood supply may result in gangrene. Sometimes
                        the pressure of the extravasated blood causes the skin to slough and,
                        later, give way, and fatal haemorrhage results.

                        The _treatment_ is carried out on the same lines as for a ruptured
                        artery (p. 261), it being remembered, however, that the artery is
                        diseased and does not lend itself to reconstructive procedures.

                        _Suppuration_ may occur in the vicinity of an aneurysm, and the aneurysm
                        may burst into the abscess which forms, so that when the latter points
                        the pus is mixed with broken-down blood-clot, and finally free
                        haemorrhage takes place. It has more than once happened that a surgeon
                        has incised such an abscess without having recognised its association
                        with aneurysm, with tragic results.

                        #Treatment.#--In treating an aneurysm, the indications are to imitate
                        Nature's method of cure by means of laminated clot.

                        _Constitutional treatment_ consists in taking measures to reduce the
                        arterial tension and to diminish the force of the heart's action. The
                        patient must be kept in bed. A dry and non-stimulating diet is
                        indicated, the quantity being gradually reduced till it is just
                        sufficient to maintain nutrition. Saline purges are employed to reduce
                        the vascular tension. The benefit derived from potassium iodide
                        administered in full doses, as first recommended by George W. Balfour,
                        probably depends on its depressing action on the heart and its
                        therapeutic benefit in syphilis. Pain or restlessness may call for the
                        use of opiates, of which heroin is the most efficient.

                        _Local Treatment._--When constitutional treatment fails, local measures
                        must be adopted, and many methods are available.

                        #Endo-aneurysmorrhaphy.#--The operation devised by Rudolf Matas in 1888
                        aims at closing the opening between the sac and its feeding artery, and
                        in addition, folding the wall of the sac in such a way as to leave no
                        vacant space. If there is marked disease of the vessel, Matas' operation
                        is not possible and recourse is then had to ligation of the artery just
                        above the sac.

                        _Extirpation of the Sac--The Old Operation._--The procedure which goes
                        by this name consists in exposing the aneurysm, incising the sac,
                        clearing out the clots, and ligating the artery above and below the sac.
                        This method is suitable to sacculated aneurysm of the limbs, so long as
                        they are circumscribed and free from complications. It has been
                        successfully practised also in aneurysm of the subclavian, carotid, and
                        external iliac arteries. It is not applicable to cases in which there is
                        such a degree of atheroma as would interfere with the successful
                        ligation of the artery. The continuity of the artery may be restored by
                        grafting into the gap left after excision of the sac a segment of the
                        great saphena vein.

                        _Ligation of the Artery._--The object of tying the artery is to diminish
                        or to arrest the flow of blood through the aneurysm so that the blood
                        coagulates both in the sac and in the feeding artery. The ligature may
                        be applied on the cardiac side of the aneurysm--proximal ligation, or to
                        the artery beyond--distal ligation.

                        _Proximal Ligation._--The ligature may be applied immediately above the
                        sac (Anel, 1710) or at a distance above (John Hunter, 1785). The
                        _Hunterian operation_ ensures that the ligature is applied to a part of
                        the artery that is presumably healthy and where relations are
                        undisturbed by the proximity of the sac; the best example is the
                        ligation of the superficial femoral artery in Scarpa's triangle or in
                        Hunter's canal for popliteal aneurysm; it is on record that Syme
                        performed this operation with cure of the aneurysm on thirty-nine
                        occasions.

                        It is to be noted that the Hunterian ligature does not aim at
                        _arresting_ the flow of blood through the sac, but is designed so to
                        diminish its volume and force as to favour the deposition within the sac
                        of laminated clot. The development of the collateral circulation which
                        follows upon ligation of the artery at a distance above the sac may be
                        attended with just that amount of return stream which favours the
                        deposit of laminated clot, and consequently the cure of the aneurysm;
                        the return stream may, however, be so forcible as to prevent coagulation
                        of the blood in the sac, or only to allow of the formation of a red
                        thrombus which may in its turn be dispersed so that pulsation in the sac
                        recurs. This does not necessarily imply failure to cure, as the
                        recurrent pulsation may only be temporary; the formation of laminated
                        clot may ultimately take place and lead to consolidation of the
                        aneurysm.

                        The least desirable result of the Hunterian ligature is met with in
                        cases where, owing to widespread arterial disease, the collateral
                        circulation does not develop and gangrene of the limb supervenes.

                        _Anel's ligature_ is only practised as part of the operation which deals
                        with the sac directly.

                        _Distal Ligation._--The tying of the artery beyond the sac, or of its
                        two branches where it bifurcates (Brasdor, 1760, and Wardrop, 1825), may
                        arrest or only diminish the flow of blood through the sac. It is less
                        successful than the proximal ligature, and is therefore restricted to
                        aneurysms so situated as not to be amenable to other methods; for
                        example, in aneurysm of the common carotid near its origin, the artery
                        may be ligated near its bifurcation, or in aneurysm of the innominate
                        artery, the carotid and subclavian arteries are tied at the seat of
                        election.

                        _Compression._--Digital compression of the feeding artery has been given
                        up except as a preparation for operations on the sac with a view to
                        favouring the development of a collateral circulation.

                        _Macewen's acupuncture or "needling"_ consists in passing one or more
                        fine, highly tempered steel needles through the tissues overlying the
                        aneurysm, and through its outer wall. The needles are made to touch the
                        opposite wall of the sac, and the pulsation of the aneurysm imparts a
                        movement to them which causes them to scarify the inner surface of the
                        sac. White thrombus forms on the rough surface produced, and leads to
                        further coagulation. The needles may be left in position for some hours,
                        being shifted from time to time, the projecting ends being surrounded
                        with sterile gauze.

                        The _Moore-Corradi method_ consists in introducing through the wall of
                        the aneurysm a hollow insulated needle, through the lumen of which from
                        10 to 20 feet of highly drawn silver or other wire is passed into the
                        sac, where it coils up into an open meshwork (Fig. 73). The positive
                        pole of a galvanic battery is attached to the wire, and the negative
                        pole placed over the patient's back. A current, varying in strength from
                        20 to 70 milliamperes, is allowed to flow for about an hour. The hollow
                        needle is then withdrawn, but the wire is left _in situ_. The results
                        are somewhat similar to those obtained by needling, but the clot formed
                        on the large coil of wire is more extensive.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 73.--Radiogram of Innominate Aneurysm after
                        treatment by the Moore-Corradi method. Two feet of finely drawn silver
                        wire were introduced. The patient, a woman, aet. 47, lived for ten months
                        after operation, free from pain (cf. Fig. 75).]

                        Colt's method of wiring has been mainly used in the treatment of
                        abdominal aneurysm; gilt wire in the form of a wisp is introduced
                        through the cannula and expands into an umbrella shape.

                        _Subcutaneous Injections of Gelatin._--Three or four ounces of a 2 per
                        cent. solution of white gelatin in sterilised water, at a temperature of
                        about 100 o F., are injected into the subcutaneous tissue of the abdomen
                        every two, three, or four days. In the course of a fortnight or three
                        weeks improvement may begin. The clot which forms is liable to soften
                        and be absorbed, but a repetition of the injection has in several cases
                        established a permanent cure.

                        _Amputation of the limb_ is indicated in cases complicated by
                        suppuration, by secondary haemorrhage after excision or ligation, or by
                        gangrene. Amputation at the shoulder was performed by Fergusson in a
                        case of subclavian aneurysm, as a means of arresting the blood-flow
                        through the sac.


                        TRAUMATIC ANEURYSM

                        The essential feature of a traumatic aneurysm is that it is produced by
                        some form of injury which divides all the coats of the artery. The walls
                        of the injured vessel are presumably healthy, but they form no part of
                        the sac of the aneurysm. The sac consists of the condensed and thickened
                        tissues around the artery.

                        The injury to the artery may be a subcutaneous one such as a tear by a
                        fragment of bone: much more commonly it is a punctured wound from a stab
                        or from a bullet.

                        The aneurysm usually forms soon after the injury is inflicted; the blood
                        slowly escapes into the surrounding tissues, gradually displacing and
                        condensing them, until they form a sac enclosing the effused blood.

                        Less frequently a traumatic aneurysm forms some considerable time after
                        the injury, from gradual stretching of the fibrous cicatrix by which the
                        wound in the wall of the artery has been closed. The gradual stretching
                        of this cicatrix results in condensation of the surrounding structures
                        which form the sac, on the inner aspect of which laminated clot is
                        deposited.

                        A traumatic aneurysm is almost always sacculated, and, so long as it
                        remains circumscribed, has the same characters as a pathological
                        sacculated aneurysm, with the addition that there is a scar in the
                        overlying skin. A traumatic aneurysm is liable to become diffuse--a
                        change which, although attended with considerable risk of gangrene, has
                        sometimes been the means of bringing about a cure.

                        The treatment is governed by the same principles as apply to the
                        pathological varieties, but as the walls of the artery are not diseased,
                        operative measures dealing with the sac and the adjacent segment of the
                        affected artery are to be preferred.


                        ARTERIO-VENOUS ANEURYSM

                        An abnormal communication between an artery and a vein constitutes an
                        arterio-venous aneurysm. Two varieties are recognised--one in which the
                        communication is direct--_aneurysmal varix_; the other in which the
                        vein communicates with the artery through the medium of a sac--_varicose
                        aneurysm_.

                        Either variety may result from pathological causes, but in the majority
                        of cases they are traumatic in origin, being due to such injuries as
                        stabs, punctured wounds, and gun-shot injuries which involve both artery
                        and vein. In former times the most common situation was at the bend of
                        the elbow, the brachial artery being accidentally punctured in
                        blood-letting from the median basilic vein. Arterio-venous aneurysm is a
                        frequent result of injuries by modern high-velocity bullets--for
                        example, in the neck or groin.

                        In _aneurysmal varix_ the higher blood pressure in the artery forces
                        arterial blood into the vein, which near the point of communication with
                        the artery tends to become dilated, and to form a thick-walled sac,
                        beyond which the vessel and its tributaries are distended and tortuous.
                        The clinical features resemble those associated with varicose veins, but
                        the entrance of arterial blood into the dilated veins causes them to
                        pulsate, and produces in them a vibratory thrill and a loud murmur. In
                        those at the groin, the distension of the veins may be so great that
                        they look like sinuses running through the muscles, a feature that must
                        be taken into account in any operation.

                        As the condition tends to remain stationary, the support of an elastic
                        bandage is all that is required; but when the condition progresses and
                        causes serious inconvenience, it may be necessary to cut down and expose
                        the communication between the artery and vein, and, after separating the
                        vessels, to close the opening in each by suture; this may be difficult
                        or impossible if the parts are matted from former suppuration. If it is
                        impossible thus to obliterate the communication, the artery should be
                        ligated above and below the point of communication; although the risk of
                        gangrene is considerable unless means are taken to develop the
                        collateral circulation beforehand (Makins).

                        _Varicose aneurysm_ usually develops in relation to a traumatic
                        aneurysm, the sac becoming adherent to an adjacent vein, and ultimately
                        opening into it. In this way a communication between the artery and the
                        vein is established, and the clinical features are those of a
                        combination of aneurysm and aneurysmal varix.

                        As there is little tendency to spontaneous cure, and as the aneurysm is
                        liable to increase in size and finally to rupture, operative treatment
                        is usually called for. This is carried out on the same lines as for
                        aneurysmal varix, and at the same time incising the sac, turning out the
                        clots, and ligating any branches which open into the sac. If it can be
                        avoided, the vein should not be ligated.


                        ANEURYSMS OF INDIVIDUAL ARTERIES

                        #Thoracic Aneurysm.#--All varieties of aneurysm occur in the aorta, the
                        fusiform being the most common, although a sacculated aneurysm
                        frequently springs from a fusiform dilatation.

                        The _clinical features_ depend chiefly on the direction in which the
                        aneurysm enlarges, and are not always well marked even when the sac is
                        of considerable size. They consist in a pulsatile swelling--sometimes in
                        the supra-sternal notch, but usually towards the right side of the
                        sternum--with an increased area of dulness on percussion. With the
                        X-rays a dark shadow is seen corresponding to the sac. Pain is usually a
                        prominent symptom, and is largely referable to the pressure of the
                        aneurysm on the vertebrae or the sternum, causing erosion of these bones.
                        Pressure on the thoracic veins and on the air-passage causes cyanosis
                        and dyspnoea. When the oesophagus is pressed upon, the patient may have
                        difficulty in swallowing. The left recurrent nerve may be stretched or
                        pressed upon as it hooks round the arch of the aorta, and hoarseness of
                        the voice and a characteristic "brassy" cough may result from paralysis
                        of the muscles of the larynx which it supplies. The vagus, the phrenic,
                        and the spinal nerves may also be pressed upon. When the aneurysm is on
                        the transverse part of the arch, the trachea is pulled down with each
                        beat of the heart--a clinical phenomena known as the "tracheal tug."
                        Aneurysm of the descending aorta may, after eroding the bodies of the
                        vertebrae (Fig. 71) and posterior portions of the ribs, form a swelling
                        in the back to the left of the spine.

                        Inasmuch as obliteration of the sac and the feeding artery is out of the
                        question, surgical treatment is confined to causing coagulation of the
                        blood in an extension or pouching of the sac, which, making its way
                        through the parietes of the chest, threatens to rupture externally. This
                        may be achieved by Macewen's needles or by the introduction of wire into
                        the sac. We have had cases under observation in which the treatment
                        referred to has been followed by such an amount of improvement that the
                        patient has been able to resume a laborious occupation for one or more
                        years. Christopher Heath found that improvement followed ligation of the
                        left common carotid in aneurysm of the transverse part of the aortic
                        arch.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 74.--Thoracic Aneurysm, threatening to rupture
                        externally, but prevented from doing so by Macewen's needling. The
                        needles were left in for forty-eight hours.]

                        #Abdominal Aneurysm.#--Aneurysm is much less frequent in the abdominal
                        than in the thoracic aorta. While any of the large branches in the
                        abdomen may be affected, the most common seats are in the aorta itself,
                        just above the origin of the coeliac artery and at the bifurcation.

                        The _clinical features_ vary with the site of the aneurysm and with its
                        rapidity and direction of growth. A smooth, rounded swelling, which
                        exhibits expansile pulsation, forms, usually towards the left of the
                        middle line. It may extend upwards under cover of the ribs, downwards
                        towards the pelvis, or backward towards the loin. On palpation a
                        systolic thrill may be detected, but the presence of a murmur is neither
                        constant nor characteristic. Pain is usually present; it may be
                        neuralgic in character, or may simulate renal colic. When the aneurysm
                        presses on the vertebrae and erodes them, the symptoms simulate those of
                        spinal caries, particularly if, as sometimes happens, symptoms of
                        compression paraplegia ensue. In its growth the swelling may press upon
                        and displace the adjacent viscera, and so interfere with their
                        functions.

                        The _diagnosis_ has to be made from solid or cystic tumours overlying
                        the artery; from a "pulsating aorta"; and from spinal caries; much help
                        is obtained by the use of the X-rays.

                        The condition usually proves fatal, either by the aneurysm bursting into
                        the peritoneal cavity, or by slow leakage into the retro-peritoneal
                        tissue.

                        The Moore-Corradi method has been successfully employed, access to the
                        sac having been obtained by opening the abdomen. Ligation of the aorta
                        has so far been unsuccessful, but in one case operated upon by Keen the
                        patient survived forty-eight days.

                        #Innominate aneurysm# may be of the fusiform or of the sacculated
                        variety, and is frequently associated with pouching of the aorta. It
                        usually grows upwards and laterally, projecting above the sternum and
                        right clavicle, which may be eroded or displaced (Fig. 75). Symptoms of
                        pressure on the structures in the neck, similar to those produced by
                        aortic aneurysm, occur. The pulses in the right upper extremity and in
                        the right carotid and its branches are diminished and delayed. Pressure
                        on the right brachial plexus causes shooting pain down the arm and
                        muscular paresis on that side. Vaso-motor disturbances and contraction
                        of the pupil on the right side may result from pressure on the
                        sympathetic. Death may take place from rupture, or from pressure on the
                        air-passage.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 75.--Innominate Aneurysm in a woman, aet. 47, eight
                        months after treatment by Moore-Corradi method (cf. Fig. 73).]

                        The available methods of treatment are ligation of the right common
                        carotid and third part of the right subclavian (Wardrop's operation), of
                        which a number of successful cases have been recorded. Those most
                        suitable for ligation are cases in which the aneurysm is circumscribed
                        and globular (Sheen). If ligation is found to be impracticable, the
                        Moore-Corradi method or Macewen's needling may be tried.

                        #Carotid Aneurysms.#--Aneurysm of the _common carotid_ is more frequent
                        on the right than on the left side, and is usually situated either at
                        the root of the neck or near the bifurcation. It is the aneurysm most
                        frequently met with in women. From its position the swelling is liable
                        to press on the vagus, recurrent and sympathetic nerves, on the
                        air-passage, and on the oesophagus, giving rise to symptoms referable to
                        such pressure. There may be cerebral symptoms from interference with the
                        blood supply of the brain.

                        Aneurysm near the origin has to be diagnosed from subclavian,
                        innominate, and aortic aneurysm, and from other swellings--solid or
                        fluid--met with in the neck. It is often difficult to determine with
                        precision the trunk from which an aneurysm at the root of the neck
                        originates, and not infrequently more than one vessel shares in the
                        dilatation. A careful consideration of the position in which the
                        swelling first appeared, of the direction in which it has progressed, of
                        its pressure effects, and of the condition of the pulses beyond, may
                        help in distinguishing between aortic, innominate, carotid, and
                        subclavian aneurysms. Skiagraphy is also of assistance in recognising
                        the vessel involved.

                        Tumours of the thyreoid, enlarged lymph glands, and fatty and
                        sarcomatous tumours can usually be distinguished from aneurysm by the
                        history of the swelling and by physical examination. Cystic tumours and
                        abscesses in the neck are sometimes more difficult to differentiate on
                        account of the apparently expansile character of the pulsation
                        transmitted to them. The fact that compression of the vessel does not
                        affect the size and tension of these fluid swellings is useful in
                        distinguishing them from aneurysm.

                        _Treatment._--Digital compression of the vessel against the transverse
                        process of the sixth cervical vertebra--the "carotid tubercle"--has been
                        successfully employed in the treatment of aneurysm near the bifurcation.
                        Proximal ligation in the case of high aneurysms, or distal ligation in
                        those situated at the root of the neck, is more certain. Extirpation of
                        the sac is probably the best method of treatment, especially in those of
                        traumatic origin. These operations are attended with considerable risk
                        of hemiplegia from interference with the blood supply of the brain.

                        The _external carotid_ and the cervical portion of the _internal
                        carotid_ are seldom the primary seat of aneurysm, although they are
                        liable to be implicated by the upward spread of an aneurysm at the
                        bifurcation of the common trunk. In addition to the ordinary signs of
                        aneurysm, the clinical manifestations are chiefly referable to pressure
                        on the pharynx and larynx, and on the hypoglossal nerve. Aneurysm of the
                        internal carotid is of special importance on account of the way in which
                        it bulges into the pharynx in the region of the tonsil, in some cases
                        closely simulating a tonsillar abscess. Cases are on record in which
                        such an aneurysm has been mistaken for an abscess and incised, with
                        disastrous results.

                        _Aneurysmal varix_ may occur in the neck as a result of stabs or bullet
                        wounds. The communication is usually between the common carotid artery
                        and the internal jugular vein. The resulting interference with the
                        cerebral circulation causes headache, giddiness, and other brain
                        symptoms, and a persistent loud murmur is usually a source of annoyance
                        to the patient and may be sufficient indication for operative treatment.

                        #Intracranial aneurysm# involves the internal carotid and its branches,
                        or the basilar artery, and appears to be more frequently associated with
                        syphilis and with valvular disease of the heart than are external
                        aneurysms. It gives rise to symptoms similar to those of other
                        intracranial tumours, and there is sometimes a loud murmur. It usually
                        proves fatal by rupture, and intracranial haemorrhage. The treatment is
                        to ligate the common carotid or the vertebral artery in the neck,
                        according to the seat of the aneurysm.

                        #Orbital Aneurysm.#--The term pulsating exophthalmos is employed to
                        embrace a number of pathological conditions, including aneurysm, in
                        which the chief symptoms are pulsation in the orbit and protrusion of
                        the eyeball. There may be, in addition, congestion and oedema of the
                        eyelids, and a distinct thrill and murmur, which can be controlled by
                        compression of the common carotid in the neck. Varying degrees of ocular
                        paralysis and of interference with vision may also be present.

                        These symptoms are due, in the majority of cases, to an aneurysmal varix
                        of the internal carotid artery and cavernous sinus, which is often
                        traumatic in origin, being produced either by fracture of the base of
                        the skull or by a punctured wound of the orbit. In other cases they are
                        due to aneurysm of the ophthalmic artery, to thrombosis of the cavernous
                        sinus, and, in rare instances, to cirsoid aneurysm.

                        If compression of the common carotid is found to arrest the pulsation,
                        ligation of this vessel is indicated.

                        #Subclavian Aneurysm.#--Subclavian aneurysm is usually met with in men
                        who follow occupations involving constant use of the shoulder--for
                        example, dock-porters and coal-heavers. It is more common on the right
                        side.

                        The aneurysm usually springs from the third part of the artery, and
                        appears as a tense, rounded, pulsatile swelling just above the clavicle
                        and to the outer side of the sterno-mastoid muscle. It occasionally
                        extends towards the thorax, where it may become adherent to the pleura.
                        The radial pulse on the same side is small and delayed. Congestion and
                        oedema of the arm, with pain, numbness, and muscular weakness, may result
                        from pressure on the veins and nerves as they pass under the clavicle;
                        and pressure on the phrenic nerve may induce hiccough. The aneurysm is
                        of slow growth, and occasionally undergoes spontaneous cure.

                        The conditions most likely to be mistaken for it are a soft, rapidly
                        growing sarcoma, and a normal artery raised on a cervical rib.

                        On account of the relations of the artery and of its branches, treatment
                        is attended with greater difficulty and danger in subclavian than in
                        almost any other form of external aneurysm. The available operative
                        measures are proximal ligation of the innominate, and distal ligation.
                        In some cases it has been found necessary to combine distal ligation
                        with amputation at the shoulder-joint, to prevent the collateral
                        circulation maintaining the flow through the aneurysm. Matas' operation
                        has been successfully performed by Hogarth Pringle.

                        #Axillary Aneurysm.#--This is usually met with in the right arm of
                        labouring men and sailors, and not infrequently follows an injury in the
                        region of the shoulder. The vessel may be damaged by the head of a
                        dislocated humerus or in attempts to reduce the dislocation, by the
                        fragments of a fractured bone, or by a stab or cut. Sometimes the vein
                        also is injured and an arterio-venous aneurysm established.

                        Owing to the laxity of the tissues, it increases rapidly, and it may
                        soon attain a large size, filling up the axilla, and displacing the
                        clavicle upwards. This renders compression of the third part of the
                        subclavian difficult or impossible. It may extend beneath the clavicle
                        into the neck, or, extending inwards may form adhesions to the chest
                        wall, and, after eroding the ribs, to the pleura.

                        The usual symptoms of aneurysm are present, and the pressure effects on
                        the veins and nerves are similar to those produced by an aneurysm of the
                        subclavian. Intra-thoracic complications, such as pleurisy or pneumonia,
                        are not infrequent when there are adhesions to the chest wall and
                        pleura. Rupture may take place externally, into the shoulder-joint, or
                        into the pleura.

                        Extirpation of the sac is the operation of choice, but, if this is
                        impracticable, ligation of the third part of the subclavian may be had
                        recourse to.

                        #Brachial aneurysm# usually occurs at the bend of the elbow, is of
                        traumatic origin, and is best treated by excision of the sac.

                        _Aneurysmal varix_, which was frequently met with in this situation in
                        the days of the barber-surgeons,--usually as a result of the artery
                        having been accidentally wounded while performing venesection of the
                        median basilic vein,--may be treated, according to the amount of
                        discomfort it causes, by a supporting bandage, or by ligation of the
                        artery above and below the point of communication.

                        Aneurysms of the vessels of the #forearm and hand# call for no special
                        mention; they are almost invariably traumatic, and are treated by
                        excision of the sac.

                        #Inguinal Aneurysm# (_Aneurysm of the Iliac and Femoral
                        Arteries_).--Aneurysms appearing in the region of Poupart's ligament may
                        have their origin in the external or common iliac arteries or in the
                        upper part of the femoral. On account of the tension of the fascia lata,
                        they tend to spread upwards towards the abdomen, and, to a less extent,
                        downwards into the thigh. Sometimes a constriction occurs across the
                        sac at the level of Poupart's ligament.

                        The pressure exerted on the nerves and veins of the lower extremity
                        causes pain, congestion, and oedema of the limb. Rupture may take place
                        externally, or into the cellular tissue of the iliac fossa.

                        These aneurysms have to be diagnosed from pulsating sarcoma growing from
                        the pelvic bones, and from an abscess or a mass of enlarged lymph glands
                        overlying the artery and transmitting its pulsation.

                        The method of treatment that has met with most success is ligation of
                        the common or external iliac, reached either by reflecting the
                        peritoneum from off the iliac fossa (extra-peritoneal operation), or by
                        going through the peritoneal cavity (trans-peritoneal operation).

                        #Gluteal Aneurysm.#--An aneurysm in the buttock may arise from the
                        superior or from the inferior gluteal artery, but by the time it forms a
                        salient swelling it is seldom possible to recognise by external
                        examination in which vessel it takes origin. The special symptoms to
                        which it gives rise are pain down the limb from pressure on the sciatic
                        nerve, and interference with the movements at the hip.

                        Ligation of the hypogastric (internal iliac) by the trans-peritoneal
                        route is the most satisfactory method of treatment. Extirpation of the
                        sac is difficult and dangerous, especially when the aneurysm has spread
                        into the pelvis.

                        #Femoral Aneurysm.#--Aneurysm of the femoral artery beyond the origin of
                        the profunda branch is usually traumatic in origin, and is more common
                        in Scarpa's triangle than in Hunter's canal. Any of the methods already
                        described is available for their treatment--the choice lying between
                        Matas' operation and ligation of the external iliac.

                        Aneurysm of the _profunda femoris_ is distinguished from that of the
                        main trunk by the fact that the pulses beyond are, in the former,
                        unaffected, and by the normal artery being felt pulsating over or
                        alongside the sac.

                        In _aneurysmal varix_, a not infrequent result of a bullet wound or a
                        stab, the communication with the vein may involve the main trunk of the
                        femoral artery. Should operative interference become necessary as a
                        result of progressive increase in size of the tumour, or progressive
                        distension of the veins of the limb, an attempt should be made to
                        separate the vessels concerned and to close the opening in each by
                        suture. If this is impracticable, the artery is tied above and below the
                        communication; gangrene of the limb may supervene, and we have observed
                        a case in which the gangrene extended up to the junction of the middle
                        and lower thirds of the thigh, and in which recovery followed upon
                        amputation of the thigh.

                        #Popliteal Aneurysm.#--This is the most common surgical aneurysm, and is
                        not infrequently met with in both limbs. It is generally due to disease
                        of the artery, and repeated slight strains, which are so liable to occur
                        at the knee, play an important part in its formation. In former times it
                        was common in post-boys, from the repeated flexion and extension of the
                        knee in riding.

                        The aneurysm is usually of the sacculated variety, and may spring from
                        the front or from the back of the vessel. It may exert pressure on the
                        bones and ligaments of the joint, and it has been known to rupture into
                        the articulation. The pain, stiffness, and effusion into the joint which
                        accompany these changes often lead to an erroneous diagnosis of joint
                        disease. The sac may press upon the popliteal artery or vein and their
                        branches, causing congestion and oedema of the leg, and lead to gangrene.
                        Pressure on the tibial and common peroneal nerves gives rise to severe
                        pain, muscular cramp, and weakness of the leg.

                        The differential diagnosis is to be made from abscess, bursal cyst,
                        enlarged glands, and sarcoma, especially pulsating sarcoma of one of the
                        bones entering into the knee joint.

                        The choice of operation lies between ligation of the femoral artery in
                        Hunter's canal, and Matas' operation of aneurysmo-arteriorrhaphy. The
                        success which attends the Hunterian operation is evidenced by the fact
                        that Syme performed it thirty-seven times without a single failure. If
                        it fails, the old operation should be considered, but it is a more
                        serious operation, and one which is more liable to be followed by
                        gangrene of the limb. Experience shows that ligation of the vein, or
                        even the removal of a portion of it, is not necessarily followed by
                        gangrene. The risk of gangrene is diminished by a course of digital
                        compression of the femoral artery, before operating on the aneurysm.

                        _Aneurysmal varix_ is sometimes met with in the region of the popliteal
                        space. It is characterised by the usual symptoms, and is treated by
                        palliative measures, or by ligation of the artery above and below the
                        point of communication.

                        _Aneurysm_ in the #leg and foot# is rare. It is almost always traumatic,
                        and is treated by excision of the sac.




                        CHAPTER XV

                        THE LYMPH VESSELS AND GLANDS


                        Anatomy and Physiology--INJURIES OF LYMPH VESSELS--_Wounds of
                            thoracic duct_--DISEASES OF LYMPH VESSELS--Lymphangitis:
                            _Varieties_--Lymphangiectasis--Filarial
                            disease--Lymphangioma--DISEASES OF LYMPH
                            GLANDS--Lymphadenitis: _Septic_; _Tuberculous_;
                            _Syphilitic_--Lymphadenoma--Leucocythaemia--TUMOURS.

                        #Surgical Anatomy and Physiology.#--Lymph is essentially blood plasma,
                        which has passed through the walls of capillaries. After bathing
                        and nourishing the tissues, it is collected by lymph vessels, which
                        return it to the blood stream by way of the thoracic duct. These lymph
                        vessels take origin in the lymph spaces of the tissues and in the
                        walls of serous cavities, and they usually run alongside blood
                        vessels--_perivascular lymph vessels_. They have a structure similar to
                        that of veins, but are more abundantly provided with valves. Along the
                        course of the lymph trunks are the _lymph glands_, which possess a
                        definite capsule and are composed of a reticulated connective tissue,
                        the spaces of which are packed with leucocytes. The glands act as
                        filters, arresting not only inert substances, such as blood pigment
                        circulating in the lymph, but also living elements, such as cancer cells
                        or bacteria. As it passes through a gland the lymph is brought into
                        intimate contact with the leucocytes, and in bacterial infections there
                        is always a struggle between the organisms and the leucocytes, so that
                        the glands may be looked upon as an important line of defence, retarding
                        or preventing the passage of bacteria and their products into the
                        general circulation. The infective agent, moreover, in order to reach
                        the blood stream, must usually overcome the resistance of several
                        glands.

                        Lymph glands are, for the most part, arranged in groups or chains, such
                        as those in the axilla, neck, and groin. In any given situation they
                        vary in number and size in different individuals, and fresh glands may
                        be formed on comparatively slight stimulus, and disappear when the
                        stimulus is withdrawn. The best-known example of this is the increase in
                        the number of glands in the axilla which takes place during lactation;
                        when this function ceases, many of the glands become involuted and are
                        transformed into fat, and in the event of a subsequent lactation they
                        are again developed. After glands have been removed by operation, new
                        ones may be formed.

                        The following are the more important groups of glands, and the areas
                        drained by them in the head and neck and in the extremities.

                        #Head and Neck.#--_The anterior auricular (parotid and pre-auricular)
                        glands_ lie beneath the parotid fascia in front of the ear, and some
                        are partly embedded in the substance of the parotid gland; they drain
                        the parts about the temple, cheek, eyelids, and auricle, and are
                        frequently the seat of tuberculous disease. _The occipital gland_,
                        situated over the origin of the trapezius from the superior curved line,
                        drains the top and back of the head; it is rarely infected. _The
                        posterior auricular (mastoid) glands_ lie over the mastoid process, and
                        drain the side of the head and auricle. These three groups pour their
                        lymph into the superficial cervical glands. _The submaxillary_--two to
                        six in number--lie along the lower order of the mandible from the
                        symphysis to the angle, the posterior ones (paramandibular) being
                        closely connected with the submaxillary salivary gland. They receive
                        lymph from the face, lips, floor of the mouth, gums, teeth, anterior
                        part of tongue, and the alae nasi, and from the pre-auricular glands. The
                        lymph passes from them into the deeper cervical glands. They are
                        frequently infected with tubercle, with epithelioma which has spread to
                        them from the mouth, and also with pyogenic organisms. _The submental
                        glands_ lie in or close to the median line between the anterior bellies
                        of the digastric muscles, and receive lymph from the lips. It is rare
                        for them to be the seat of tubercle, but in epithelioma of the lower lip
                        and floor of the mouth they are infected at an early stage of the
                        disease. _The supra-hyoid gland_ lies a little farther back, immediately
                        above the hyoid bone, and receives lymph from the tongue. _The
                        superficial cervical (external jugular) glands_, when present, lie along
                        the external jugular vein, and receives lymph from the occipital and
                        auricular glands and from the auricle. _The sterno-mastoid
                        glands_--glandulae concatinatae--form a chain along the posterior edge of
                        the sterno-mastoid muscle, some of them lying beneath the muscle. They
                        are commonly enlarged in secondary syphilis. _The superior deep cervical
                        (internal jugular) glands_--from six to twenty in number--form a
                        continuous chain along the internal jugular vein, beneath the
                        sterno-mastoid muscle. They drain the various groups of glands which lie
                        nearer the surface, also the interior of the skull, the larynx, trachea,
                        thyreoid, and lower part of the pharynx, and pour their lymph into the
                        main trunks at the root of the neck. Belonging to this group is one
                        large gland (the tonsillar gland) which lies behind the posterior belly
                        of the digastric, and rests in the angle between the internal jugular
                        and common facial veins. It is commonly enlarged in affections of the
                        tonsil and posterior part of the tongue. In the same group are three or
                        four glands which lie entirely under cover of the upper end of the
                        sterno-mastoid muscle, and surround the accessory nerve before it
                        perforates the muscle. The deep cervical glands are commonly infected by
                        tubercle and also by epithelioma secondary to disease in the tongue or
                        throat. _The inferior deep cervical (supra-clavicular) glands_ lie in
                        the posterior triangle, above the clavicle. They receive lymph from the
                        lowest cervical glands, from the upper part of the chest wall, and from
                        the highest axillary glands. They are frequently infected in cancer of
                        the breast; those on the left side also in cancer of the stomach. The
                        removal of diseased supra-clavicular glands is not to be lightly
                        undertaken, as difficulties are liable to ensue in connection with the
                        thoracic duct, the pleura, or the junction of the subclavian and
                        internal jugular veins. _The retro-pharyngeal glands_ lie on each side
                        of the median line upon the rectus capitis anticus major muscle and in
                        front of the pre-vertebral layer of the cervical fascia. They receive
                        part of the lymph from the posterior wall of the pharynx, the interior
                        of the nose and its accessory cavities, the auditory (Eustachian) tube,
                        and the tympanum. When they are infected with pyogenic organisms or
                        with tubercle bacilli, they may lead to the formation of one form of
                        retro-pharyngeal abscess.

                        #Upper Extremity.#--_The epi-trochlear and cubital glands_ vary in
                        number, that most commonly present lying about an inch and a half above
                        the medial epi-condyle, and other and smaller glands may lie along the
                        medial (internal) bicipital groove or at the bend of the elbow. They
                        drain the ulnar side of the hand and forearm, and pour their lymph into
                        the axillary group. The epi-trochlear gland is sometimes enlarged in
                        syphilis. _The axillary glands_ are arranged in groups: a central group
                        lies embedded in the axillary fascia and fat, and is often related to an
                        opening in it; a posterior or subscapular group lies along the line of
                        the subscapular vessels; anterior or pectoral groups lie behind the
                        pectoralis minor, along the medial side of the axillary vein, and an
                        inter-pectoral group, between the two pectoral muscles. The axillary
                        glands receive lymph from the arm, mamma, and side of the chest, and
                        pass it on into the lowest cervical glands and the main lymph trunk.
                        They are frequently the seat of pyogenic, tuberculous, and cancerous
                        infection, and their complete removal is an essential part of the
                        operation for cancer of the breast.

                        #Lower Extremity.#--_The popliteal glands_ include one superficial gland
                        at the termination of the small saphenous vein, and several deeper ones
                        in relation to the popliteal vessels. They receive lymph from the toes
                        and foot, and transmit it to the inguinal glands. _The femoral glands_
                        lie vertically along the upper part of the great saphenous vein, and
                        receive lymph from the leg and foot; from them the lymph passes to the
                        deep inguinal and external iliac glands. The femoral glands often
                        participate in pyogenic infections entering through the skin of the toes
                        and sole of the foot. _The superficial inguinal glands_ lie along the
                        inguinal (Poupart's) ligament, and receive lymph from the external
                        genitals, anus, perineum, buttock, and anterior abdominal wall. The
                        lymph passes on to the deep inguinal and external iliac glands. The
                        superficial glands through their relations to the genitals are
                        frequently the subject of venereal infection, and also of epithelioma
                        when this disease affects the genitals or anus; they are rarely the seat
                        of tuberculosis. _The deep inguinal glands_ lie on the medial side of
                        the femoral vein, and sometimes within the femoral canal. They receive
                        lymph from the deep lymphatics of the lower limb, and some of the
                        efferent vessels from the femoral and superficial inguinal glands. The
                        lymph then passes on through the femoral canal to the external iliac
                        glands. The extension of malignant disease, whether cancer or sarcoma,
                        can often be traced along these deeper lymphatics into the pelvis, and
                        as the obstruction to the flow of lymph increases there is a
                        corresponding increase in the swollen dropsical condition of the lower
                        limb on the same side.

                        The glands of the _thorax_ and _abdomen_ will be considered with the
                        surgery of these regions.


                        INJURIES OF LYMPH VESSELS

                        Lymph vessels are divided in all wounds, and the lymph that escapes from
                        them is added to any discharge that may be present. In injuries of
                        larger trunks the lymph may escape in considerable quantity as a
                        colourless, watery fluid--_lymphorrhagia_; and the opening through which
                        it escapes is known as a _lymphatic fistula_. This has been observed
                        chiefly after extensive operation for the removal of malignant glands in
                        the groin where there already exists a considerable degree of
                        obstruction to the lymph stream, and in such cases the lymph, including
                        that which has accumulated in the vessels of the limb, may escape in
                        such abundance as to soak through large dressings and delay healing.
                        Ultimately new lymph channels are formed, so that at the end of from
                        four to six weeks the discharge of lymph ceases and the wound heals.

                        _Lymphatic Oedema._--When the lymphatic return from a limb has been
                        seriously interfered with,--as, for example, when the axillary contents
                        has been completely cleared out in operating for cancer of the
                        breast,--a condition of lymphatic oedema may result, the arm becoming
                        swollen, tight, and heavy.

                        Various degrees of the conditions are met with; in the severe forms,
                        there is pain, as well as incapacity of the limb. As in ordinary oedema,
                        the condition is relieved by elevation of the limb, but not nearly to
                        the same degree; in time the tissues become so hard and tense as
                        scarcely to pit on pressure; this is in part due to the formation of new
                        connective tissue and hypertrophy of the skin; in advanced cases there
                        is a gradual transition into one form of elephantiasis.

                        Handley has devised a method of treatment--_lymphangioplasty_--the
                        object of which is to drain the lymph by embedding a number of silk
                        threads in the subcutaneous cellular tissue.

                        #Wounds of the Thoracic Duct.#--The thoracic duct usually opens at the
                        angle formed by the junction of the left internal jugular and subclavian
                        veins, but it may open into either of these vessels by one or by several
                        channels, or the duct may be double throughout its course. There is a
                        smaller duct on the right side--the right lymphatic duct. The duct or
                        ducts may be displaced by a tumour or a mass of enlarged glands, and may
                        be accidentally wounded in dissections at the root of the neck; jets of
                        milky fluid--chyle--may at once escape from it. The jets are rhythmical
                        and coincide with expiration. The injury may, however, not be observed
                        at the time of operation, but later through the dressings being soaked
                        with chyle--_chylorrhoea_. If the wound involves the only existing main
                        duct and all the chyle escapes, the patient suffers from intense thirst,
                        emaciation, and weakness, and may die of inanition; but if, as is
                        usually the case, only one of several collateral channels is implicated,
                        the loss of chyle may be of little moment, as the discharge usually
                        ceases. If the wound heals so that the chyle is prevented from escaping,
                        a fluctuating swelling may form beneath the scar; in course of time it
                        gradually disappears.

                        An attempt should be made to close the wound in the duct by means of a
                        fine suture; failing this, the duct must be occluded by a ligature as if
                        it were a bleeding artery. The tissues are then stitched over it and the
                        skin wound accurately closed, so as to obtain primary union, firm
                        pressure being applied by dressings and an elastic webbing bandage. Even
                        if the main duct is obliterated, a collateral circulation is usually
                        established. A wound of the right lymphatic duct is of less importance.

                        _Subcutaneous rupture of the thoracic duct_ may result from a crush of
                        the thorax. The chyle escapes and accumulates in the cellular tissue of
                        the posterior mediastinum, behind the peritoneum, in the pleural cavity
                        (_chylo-thorax_), or in the peritoneal cavity (_chylous ascites_). There
                        are physical signs of fluid in one or other of these situations, but, as
                        a rule, the nature of the lesion is only recognised when chyle is
                        withdrawn by the exploring needle.


                        DISEASES OF LYMPH VESSELS

                        #Lymphangitis.#--Inflammation of peripheral lymph vessels usually
                        results from some primary source of pyogenic infection in the skin. This
                        may be a wound or a purulent blister, and the streptococcus pyogenes is
                        the organism most frequently present. _Septic_ lymphangitis is commonly
                        met with in those who, from the nature of their occupation, handle
                        infective material. A _gonococcal_ form has been observed in those
                        suffering from gonorrhoea.

                        The inflammation affects chiefly the walls of the vessels, and is
                        attended with clotting of the lymph. There is also some degree of
                        inflammation of the surrounding cellular tissue--_peri-lymphangitis_.
                        One or more abscesses may form along the course of the vessels, or a
                        spreading cellulitis may supervene.

                        The _clinical features_ resemble those of other pyogenic infections, and
                        there are wavy red lines running from the source of infection towards
                        the nearest lymph glands. These correspond to the inflamed vessels, and
                        are the seat of burning pain and tenderness. The associated glands are
                        enlarged and painful. In severe cases the symptoms merge into those of
                        septicaemia. When the deep lymph vessels alone are involved, the
                        superficial red lines are absent, but the limb becomes greatly swollen
                        and pits on pressure.

                        In cases of extensive lymphangitis, especially when there are repeated
                        attacks, the vessels are obliterated by the formation of new connective
                        tissue and a persistent solid oedema results, culminating in one form of
                        elephantiasis.

                        _Treatment._--The primary source of infection is dealt with on the usual
                        lines. If the lymphangitis affects an extremity, Bier's elastic bandage
                        is applied, and if suppuration occurs, the pus is let out through one or
                        more small incisions; in other parts of the body Klapp's suction bells
                        are employed. An autogenous vaccine may be prepared and injected. When
                        the condition has subsided, the limb is massaged and evenly bandaged to
                        promote the disappearance of oedema.

                        _Tuberculous Lymphangitis._--Although lymph vessels play an important
                        role in the spread of tuberculosis, the clinical recognition of the
                        disease in them is exceptional. The infection spreads upwards along the
                        superficial lymphatics, which become nodularly thickened; at one or more
                        points, larger, peri-lymphangitic nodules may form and break down into
                        abscesses and ulcers; the nearest group of glands become infected at an
                        early stage. When the disease is widely distributed throughout the
                        lymphatics of the limb, it becomes swollen and hard--a condition
                        illustrated by lupus elephantiasis.

                        _Syphilitic lymphangitis_ is observed in cases of primary syphilis, in
                        which the vessels of the dorsum of the penis can be felt as indurated
                        cords.

                        In addition to acting as channels for the conveyance of bacterial
                        infection, _lymph vessels frequently convey the cells of malignant
                        tumours_, and especially cancer, from the seat of the primary disease to
                        the nearest lymph glands, and they may themselves become the seat of
                        cancerous growth forming nodular cords. The permeation of cancer by way
                        of the lymphatics, described by Sampson Handley, has already been
                        referred to.

                        #Lymphangiectasis# is a dilated or varicose condition of lymph vessels.
                        It is met with as a congenital affection in the tongue and lips, or it
                        may be acquired as the result of any condition which is attended with
                        extensive obliteration or blocking of the main lymph trunks. An
                        interesting type of lymphangiectasis is that which results from the
                        presence of the _filaria Bancrofti_ in the vessels, and is observed
                        chiefly in the groin, spermatic cord, and scrotum of persons who have
                        lived in the tropics.

                        _Filarial disease in the lymphatics of the groin_ appears as a soft,
                        doughy swelling, varying in size from a walnut to a cocoa-nut; it may
                        partly disappear on pressure and when the patient lies down.

                        The patient gives a history of feverish attacks of the nature of
                        lymphangitis during which the swelling becomes painful and tender. These
                        attacks may show a remarkable periodicity, and each may be followed by
                        an increase in the size of the swelling, which may extend along the
                        inguinal canal into the abdomen, or down the spermatic cord into the
                        scrotum. On dissection, the swelling is found to be made up of dilated,
                        tortuous, and thickened lymph vessels in which the parent worm is
                        sometimes found, and of greatly enlarged lymph glands which have
                        undergone fibrosis, with giant-cell formation and eosinophile
                        aggregations. The fluid in the dilated vessels is either clear or
                        turbid, in the latter case resembling chyle. The affection is frequently
                        bilateral, and may be associated with lymph scrotum, with elephantiasis,
                        and with chyluria.

                        The _diagnosis_ is to be made from such other swellings in the groin as
                        hernia, lipoma, or cystic pouching of the great saphenous vein. It is
                        confirmed by finding the recently dead or dying worms in the inflamed
                        lymph glands.

                        _Treatment._--When the disease is limited to the groin or scrotum,
                        excision may bring about a permanent cure, but it may result in the
                        formation of lymphatic sinuses and only afford temporary relief.

                        #Lymphangioma.#--A lymphangioma is a swelling composed of a series of
                        cavities and channels filled with lymph and freely communicating with
                        one another. The cavities result either from the new formation of lymph
                        spaces or vessels, or from the dilatation of those which already exist;
                        their walls are composed of fibro-areolar tissue lined by endothelium
                        and strengthened by non-striped muscle. They are rarely provided with a
                        definite capsule, and frequently send prolongations of their substance
                        between and into muscles and other structures in their vicinity. They
                        are of congenital origin and usually make their appearance at or shortly
                        after birth. When the tumour is made up of a meshwork of caverns and
                        channels, it is called a _cavernous lymphangioma_; when it is composed
                        of one or more cysts, it is called a _cystic lymphangioma_. It is
                        probable that the cysts are derived from the caverns by breaking down
                        and absorption of the intervening septa, as transition forms between the
                        cavernous and cystic varieties are sometimes met with.

                        The _cavernous lymphangioma_ appears as an ill-defined, soft swelling,
                        presenting many of the characters of a subcutaneous haemangioma, but it
                        is not capable of being emptied by pressure, it does not become tense
                        when the blood pressure is raised, as in crying, and if the tumour is
                        punctured, it yields lymph instead of blood. It also resembles a lipoma,
                        especially the congenital variety which grows from the periosteum, and
                        the differential diagnosis between these is rarely completed until the
                        swelling is punctured or explored by operation. If treatment is called
                        for, it is carried out on the same lines as for haemangioma, by means of
                        electrolysis, igni-puncture, or excision. Complete excision is rarely
                        possible because of the want of definition and encapsulation, but it is
                        not necessary for cure, as the parts that remain undergo cicatrisation.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 76.--Congenital Cystic Tumour or Hygroma of Axilla.

                        (From a photograph lent by Dr. Lediard.)]

                        The _cystic lymphangioma_, _lymphatic cyst_, or _congenital cystic
                        hygroma_ is most often met with in the neck--_hydrocele of the neck_; it
                        is situated beneath the deep fascia, and projects either in front of or
                        behind the sterno-mastoid muscle. It may attain a large size, the
                        overlying skin and cyst wall may be so thin as to be translucent, and it
                        has been known to cause serious impairment of respiration through
                        pressing on the trachea. In the axilla also the cystic tumour may attain
                        a considerable size (Fig. 76); less frequent situations are the groin,
                        and the floor of the mouth, where it constitutes one form of ranula.

                        The nature of these swellings is to be recognised by their situation, by
                        their having existed from infancy, and, if necessary, by drawing off
                        some of the contents of the cyst through a fine needle. They are usually
                        remarkably indolent, persisting often for a long term of years without
                        change, and, like the haemangioma, they sometimes undergo spontaneous
                        cicatrisation and cure. Sometimes the cystic tumour becomes infected and
                        forms an abscess--another, although less desirable, method of cure.
                        Those situated in the neck are most liable to suppurate, probably
                        because of pyogenic organisms being brought to them by the lymphatics
                        taking origin in the scalp, ear, or throat.

                        If operative interference is called for, the cysts may be tapped and
                        injected with iodine, or excised; the operation for removal may entail a
                        considerable dissection amongst the deeper structures at the root of the
                        neck, and should not be lightly undertaken; parts left behind may be
                        induced to cicatrise by inserting a tube of radium and leaving it for a
                        few days.

                        Lymphangiomas are met with in the abdomen in the form of _omental
                        cysts_.


                        DISEASES OF LYMPH GLANDS

                        #Lymphadenitis.#--Inflammation of lymph glands results from the advent
                        of an irritant, usually bacterial or toxic, brought to the glands by the
                        afferent lymph vessels. These vessels may share in the inflammation and
                        be the seat of lymphangitis, or they may show no evidence of the passage
                        of the noxa. It is exceptional for the irritant to reach the gland
                        through the blood-stream.

                        A strain or other form of trauma is sometimes blamed for the onset of
                        lymphadenitis, especially in the glands of the groin (bubo), but it is
                        usually possible to discover some source of pyogenic infection which is
                        responsible for the mischief, or to obtain a history of some antecedent
                        infection such as gonorrhoea. It is possible for gonococci to lie latent
                        in the inguinal glands for long periods, and only give rise to
                        lymphadenitis if the glands be subsequently subjected to injury. The
                        glands most frequently affected are those in the neck, axilla, and
                        groin.

                        The characters of the lymphadenitis vary with the nature of the
                        irritant. Sometimes it is mild and evanescent, as in the glandular
                        enlargement in the neck which attends tonsillitis and other forms of
                        sore throat. Sometimes it is more persistent, as in the enlargement
                        that is associated with adenoids, hypertrophied tonsils, carious teeth,
                        eczema of the scalp, and otorrhoea; and it is possible that this indolent
                        enlargement predisposes to tuberculous infection. A similar enlargement
                        is met with in the axilla in cases of chronic interstitial mastitis, and
                        in the groin as a result of chronic irritation about the external
                        genitals, such as balanitis.

                        Sometimes the lymphadenitis is of an acute character, and the tendency
                        is towards the formation of an abscess. This is illustrated in the
                        axillary glands as a result of infected wounds of the fingers; in the
                        femoral glands in infected wounds or purulent blisters on the foot; in
                        the inguinal glands in gonorrhoea and soft sore; and in the cervical
                        glands in the severer forms of sore throat associated with diphtheria
                        and scarlet fever. The most acute suppurations result from infection
                        with streptococci.

                        Superficial glands, when inflamed and suppurating, become enlarged,
                        tender, fixed, and matted to one another. In the glands of the groin the
                        suppurative process is often remarkably sluggish; purulent foci form in
                        the interior of individual glands, and some time may elapse before the
                        pus erupts through their respective capsules. In the deeply placed
                        cervical glands, especially in cases of streptococcal throat infections,
                        the suppuration rapidly involves the surrounding cellular tissue, and
                        the clinical features are those of an acute cellulitis and deeply seated
                        abscess. When this is incised the necrosed glands may be found lying in
                        the pus, and on bacteriological examination are found to be swarming
                        with streptococci. In suppuration of the axillary glands the abscess may
                        be quite superficial, or it may be deeply placed beneath the strong
                        fascia and pectoral muscles, according to the group of glands involved.

                        The _diagnosis_ of septic lymphadenitis is usually easy. The indolent
                        enlargements are not always to be distinguished, however, from
                        commencing tuberculous disease, except by the use of the tuberculin
                        test, and by the fact that they usually disappear on removing the
                        peripheral source of irritation.

                        _Treatment._--The first indication is to discover and deal with the
                        source of infection, and in the indolent forms of lymphadenitis this
                        will usually be followed by recovery. In the acute forms following on
                        pyogenic infection, the best results are obtained from the hyperaemic
                        treatment carried out by means of suction bells. If suppuration is not
                        thereby prevented, or if it has already taken place, each separate
                        collection of pus is punctured with a narrow-bladed knife and the use of
                        the suction bell is persevered with. If there is a large periglandular
                        abscess, as is often the case, in the neck and axilla, the opening may
                        require to be made by Hilton's method, and it may be necessary to insert
                        a drainage-tube.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 77.--Tuberculous Cervical Gland with abscess
                        formation in subcutaneous cellular tissue, in a boy aet. 10.]

                        #Tuberculous Disease of Glands.#--This is a disease of great frequency
                        and importance. The tubercle bacilli usually gain access to the gland
                        through the afferent lymph vessels, which convey them from some lesion
                        of the surface within the area drained by them. Tuberculous infection
                        may supervene in glands that are already enlarged as a result of chronic
                        septic irritation. While any of the glands in the body may be affected,
                        the disease is most often met with in the cervical groups which derive
                        their lymph from the mouth, nose, throat, and ear.

                        _The appearance of the glands on section_ varies with the stage of the
                        disease. In the early stages the gland is enlarged, it may be to many
                        times its natural size, is normal in appearance and consistence, and as
                        there is no peri-adenitis it is easily shelled out from its
                        surroundings. On microscopical examination, however, there is evidence
                        of infection in the shape of bacilli and of characteristic giant and
                        epithelioid cells. At a later stage, the gland tissue is studded with
                        minute yellow foci which tend to enlarge and in time to become
                        confluent, so that the whole gland is ultimately converted into a
                        caseous mass. This caseous material is surrounded by the thickened
                        capsule which, as a result of peri-adenitis, tends to become adherent to
                        and fused with surrounding structures, and particularly with layers of
                        fascia and with the walls of veins. The caseated tissue often remains
                        unchanged for long periods; it may become calcified, but more frequently
                        it breaks down and liquefies.

                        #Tuberculous disease in the cervical glands# is a common accompaniment
                        or sequel of adenoids, enlarged tonsils, carious teeth, pharyngitis,
                        middle-ear disease, and conjunctivitis. These lesions afford the bacilli
                        a chance of entry into the lymph vessels, in which they are carried to
                        the glands, where they give rise to disease.

                        The enlargement may affect only one gland, usually below the angle of
                        the mandible, and remain confined to it, the gland reaching the size of
                        a hazel-nut, and being ovoid, firm, and painless. More commonly the
                        disease affects several glands, on one or on both sides of the neck.
                        When the disease commences in the pre-auricular or submaxillary glands,
                        it tends to spread to those along the carotid sheath: when the posterior
                        auricular and occipital glands are first involved, the spread is to
                        those along the posterior border of the sterno-mastoid. In many cases
                        all the chains in front of, beneath, and behind this muscle are
                        involved, the enlarged glands extending from the mastoid to the
                        clavicle. They are at first discrete and movable, and may even vary in
                        size from time to time; but with the addition of peri-adenitis they
                        become fixed and matted together, forming lobulated or nodular masses
                        (Fig. 78). They become adherent not only to one another, but also to the
                        structures in their vicinity,--and notably to the internal jugular
                        vein,--a point of importance in regard to their removal by operation.

                        At any stage the disease may be arrested and the glands remain for long
                        periods without further change. It is possible that the tuberculous
                        tissue may undergo cicatrisation. More commonly suppuration ensues, and
                        a cold abscess forms, but if there is a mixed infection, the pyogenic
                        factor being usually derived from the throat, it may take on active
                        features.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 78.--Mass of Tuberculous Glands removed from Axilla
                        (cf. Fig. 79).]

                        The transition from the solid to the liquefied stage is attended with
                        pain and tenderness in the gland, which at the same time becomes fixed
                        and globular, and finally fluctuation can be elicited.

                        If left to itself, the softened tubercle erupts through the capsule of
                        the gland and infects the cellular tissue. The cervical fascia is
                        perforated and a cold abscess, often much larger than the gland from
                        which it took origin, forms between the fascia and the overlying skin.
                        The further stages--reddening, undermining of skin and external rupture,
                        with the formation of ulcers and sinuses--have been described with
                        tuberculous abscess. The ulcers and sinuses persist indefinitely, or
                        they heal and then break out again; sometimes the skin becomes infected,
                        and a condition like lupus spreads over a considerable area. Spontaneous
                        healing finally takes place after the caseous tubercle has been
                        extruded; the resulting scars are extremely unsightly, being puckered or
                        bridled, or hypertrophied like keloid.

                        While the disease is most common in childhood and youth, it may be met
                        with even in advanced life; and although often associated with impaired
                        health and unhealthy surroundings, it may affect those who are
                        apparently robust and are in affluent circumstances.

                        _Diagnosis._--The chief importance lies in differentiating tuberculous
                        disease from lympho-sarcoma and from lymphadenoma, and this is usually
                        possible from the history and from the nature of the enlargement. Signs
                        of liquefaction and suppuration support the diagnosis of tubercle. If
                        any doubt remains, one of the glands should be removed and submitted to
                        microscopical examination. Other forms of sarcoma, and the enlargement
                        of an accessory thyreoid, are less likely to be confused with
                        tuberculous glands. Calcified tuberculous glands give definite shadows
                        with the X-rays.

                        Enlargement of the cervical glands from secondary cancer may simulate
                        tuberculosis, but is differentiated by its association with cancer in
                        the mouth or throat, and by the characteristic, stone-like induration of
                        epithelioma.

                        The cold abscess which results from tuberculous glands is to be
                        distinguished from that due to disease in the cervical spine,
                        retro-pharyngeal abscess, as well as from congenital and other cystic
                        swellings in the neck.

                        _Prognosis._--Next to lupus, glandular disease is of all tuberculous
                        lesions the least dangerous to life; but while it is the rule to recover
                        from tuberculous disease of glands with or without an operation, it is
                        unfortunately quite common for such persons to become the subjects of
                        tuberculosis in other parts of the body at any subsequent period of
                        life.

                        _Treatment._--There is considerable difference of opinion regarding the
                        treatment of glandular tuberculosis. Some authorities, impressed with
                        the undoubted possibility of natural cure, are satisfied with promoting
                        this by measures directed towards improving the general health, by the
                        prolonged administration of tuberculin, and by repeated exposures to the
                        X-rays and to sunlight. Others again, influenced by the risk of
                        extension of the disease and by the destruction of tissue and
                        disfigurement caused by breaking down of the tuberculous tissue and
                        mixed infection, advocate the removal of the glands by operation.

                        The conditions vary widely in different cases, and the treatment should
                        be adapted to the individual requirements. If the disease remains
                        confined to the glands originally infected and there are no signs of
                        breaking down, "expectant measures" may be persevered with.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 79.--Tuberculous Axillary Glands (cf. Fig. 78).]

                        If, on the other hand, the disease exhibits aggressive tendencies, the
                        question of operation should be considered. The undesirable results of
                        the breaking down and liquefaction of the diseased gland may be avoided
                        by the timely withdrawal of the fluid contents through a hollow needle.

                        _The excision of tuberculous glands_ is often a difficult operation,
                        because of the number and deep situation of the glands to be removed,
                        and of the adhesions to surrounding structures. The skin incision must
                        be sufficiently extensive to give access to the whole of the affected
                        area, and to avoid disfigurement should, whenever possible, be made in
                        the line of the natural creases of the skin. In exposing the glands the
                        common facial and other venous trunks may require to be clamped and
                        tied. Care must be taken not to injure the important nerves,
                        particularly the accessory, the vagus, and the phrenic. The
                        inframaxillary branches of the facial, the hypoglossal and its
                        descending branches, and the motor branches of the deep cervical plexus,
                        are also liable to be injured. The dissection is rendered easier and is
                        attended with less risk of injury to the nerves, if the patient is
                        placed in the sitting posture so as to empty the veins, and, instead of
                        a knife, the conical scissors of Mayo are employed. When the glands are
                        extensively affected on both sides of the neck, it is advisable to allow
                        an interval to elapse rather than to operate on both sides at one
                        sitting. (_Op. Surg._, p. 189.)

                        If the tonsils are enlarged they should not be removed at the same time,
                        as, by so doing, there is a risk of pyogenic infection from the throat
                        being carried to the wound in the neck, but they should be removed,
                        after an interval, to prevent relapse of disease in the glands.

                        _When the skin is broken_ and caseous tuberculous tissue is exposed,
                        healing is promoted by cutting away diseased skin, removing the
                        granulation tissue with the spoon, scraping sinuses, and packing the
                        cavity with iodoform worsted and treating it by the open method and
                        secondary suture if necessary. Exposure to the sunshine on the seashore
                        and to the X-rays is often beneficial in these cases.

                        #Tuberculous disease in the axillary glands# may be a result of
                        extension from those in the neck, from the mamma, ribs, or sternum, or
                        more rarely from the upper extremity. We have seen it from an infected
                        wound of a finger. In some cases no source of infection is discoverable.
                        The individual glands attain a considerable size, and they fuse together
                        to form a large tumour which fills up the axillary space. The disease
                        progresses more rapidly than it does in the cervical glands, and almost
                        always goes on to suppuration with the formation of sinuses.
                        Conservative measures need not be considered, as the only satisfactory
                        treatment is excision, and that without delay.

                        #Leucocythaemia.#--This is a disease of the blood and of the
                        blood-forming organs, in which there is a great increase in the number,
                        and an alteration of the character, of the leucocytes present in the
                        blood. It may simulate lymphadenoma, because, in certain forms of the
                        disease, the lymph glands, especially those in the neck, axilla, and
                        groin, are greatly enlarged.


                        TUMOURS OF LYMPH GLANDS

                        #Primary Tumours.#--_Lympho-sarcoma_, which may be regarded as a sarcoma
                        starting in a lymph gland, appears in the neck, axilla, or groin as a
                        rapidly growing tumour consisting of one enlarged gland with numerous
                        satellites. As the tumour increases in size, the sarcomatous tissue
                        erupts through the capsule of the gland, and infiltrates the surrounding
                        tissues, whereby it becomes fixed to these and to the skin.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 82.--Lympho-Sarcoma removed from Groin. It will be
                        observed that there is one large central parent tumour surrounded by
                        satellites.]

                        The prognosis is grave in the extreme, and the only hope is in early
                        excision, followed by the use of radium and X-rays. We have observed a
                        case of lympho-sarcoma above the clavicle, in which excision of all that
                        was removable, followed by the insertion of a tube of radium for ten
                        days, was followed by a disappearance of the disease over a period which
                        extended to nearly five years, when death resulted from a tumour in the
                        mediastinum. In a second case in which the growth was in the groin, the
                        patient, a young man, remained well for over two years and was then lost
                        sight of.

                        #Secondary Tumours.#--Next to tuberculosis, _secondary cancer_ is the
                        most common disease of lymph glands. In the neck it is met with in
                        association with epithelioma of the lip, tongue, or fauces. The glands
                        form tumours of variable size, and are often larger than the primary
                        growth, the characters of which they reproduce. The glands are at first
                        movable, but soon become fixed both to each other and to their
                        surroundings; when fixed to the mandible they form a swelling of
                        bone-like hardness; in time they soften, liquefy, and burst through the
                        skin, forming foul, fungating ulcers. A similar condition is met with in
                        the groin from epithelioma of the penis, scrotum, or vulva. In cancer of
                        the breast, the infection of the axillary glands is an important
                        complication.

                        In _pigmented_ or _melanotic cancers_ of the skin, the glands are early
                        infected and increase rapidly, so that, when the primary growth is still
                        of small size--as, for example, on the sole of the foot--the femoral
                        glands may already constitute large pigmented tumours.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 83.--Cancerous Glands in Neck secondary to
                        Epithelioma of Lip.

                        (Mr. G. L. Chiene's case.)]

                        The implication of the glands in other forms of cancer will be
                        considered with regional surgery.

                        _Secondary sarcoma_ is seldom met with in the lymph glands except when
                        the primary growth is a lympho-sarcoma and is situated in the tonsil,
                        thyreoid, or testicle.




                        CHAPTER XVI

                        THE NERVES


                        Anatomy--INJURIES OF NERVES: Changes in nerves after division;
                            Repair and its modifications; Clinical features; _Primary and
                            secondary suture_--SUBCUTANEOUS INJURIES OF
                            NERVES--DISEASES: _Neuritis_; _Tumours_--Surgery of
                            the individual nerves: _Brachial neuralgia_; _Sciatica_;
                            _Trigeminal neuralgia_.

                        #Anatomy.#--A nerve-trunk is made up of a variable number of bundles of
                        nerve fibres surrounded and supported by a framework of connective
                        tissue. The nerve fibres are chiefly of the medullated type, and they
                        run without interruption from a nerve cell or _neuron_ in the brain or
                        spinal medulla to their peripheral terminations in muscle, skin, and
                        secretory glands.

                        Each nerve fibre consists of a number of nerve fibrils collected into a
                        central bundle--the axis cylinder--which is surrounded by an envelope,
                        the neurolemma or sheath of Schwann. Between the neurolemma and the axis
                        cylinder is the medullated sheath, composed of a fatty substance known
                        as myelin. This medullated sheath is interrupted at the nodes of
                        Ranvier, and in each internode is a nucleus lying between the myelin and
                        the neurolemma. The axis cylinder is the essential conducting structure
                        of the nerve, while the neurolemma and the myelin act as insulating
                        agents. The axis cylinder depends for its nutrition on the central
                        neuron with which it is connected, and from which it originally
                        developed, and it degenerates if it is separated from its neuron.

                        The connective-tissue framework of a nerve-trunk consists of the
                        _perineurium_, or general sheath, which surrounds all the bundles; the
                        _epineurium_, surrounding individual groups of bundles; and the
                        _endoneurium_, a delicate connective tissue separating the individual
                        nerve fibres. The blood vessels and lymphatics run in these
                        connective-tissue sheaths.

                        According to Head and his co-workers, Sherren and Rivers, the afferent
                        fibres in the peripheral nerves can be divided into three systems:--

                        1. Those which subserve _deep sensibility_ and conduct the impulses
                        produced by pressure as well as those which enable the patient to
                        recognise the position of a joint on passive movement (joint-sensation),
                        and the kinaesthetic sense, which recognises that active contraction of
                        the muscle is taking place (active muscle-sensation). The fibres of this
                        system run with the motor nerves, and pass to muscles, tendons, and
                        joints. Even division of both the ulnar and the median nerves above the
                        wrist produces little loss of deep sensibility, unless the tendons are
                        also cut through. The failure to recognise this form of sensibility has
                        been largely responsible for the conflicting statements as to the
                        sensory phenomena following operations for the repair of divided nerves.

                        2. Those which subserve _protopathic_ sensibility--that is, are capable
                        of responding to painful cutaneous stimuli and to the extremes of heat
                        and cold. These also endow the hairs with sensibility to pain. They are
                        the first to regenerate after division.

                        3. Those which subserve _epicritic_ sensibility, the most highly
                        specialised, capable of appreciating light touch, _e.g._ with a wisp of
                        cotton wool, as a well-localised sensation, and the finer grades of
                        temperature, called cool and warm (72 o-104 o F.), and of discriminating
                        as separate the points of a pair of compasses 2 cms. apart. These are
                        the last to regenerate.

                        A nerve also exerts a trophic influence on the tissues in which it is
                        distributed.

                        The researches of Stoffel on the minute anatomy of the larger nerves,
                        and the disposition in them of the bundles of nerve fibres supplying
                        different groups of muscles, have opened up what promises to be a
                        fruitful field of clinical investigation and therapeutics. He has shown
                        that in the larger nerve-trunks the nerve bundles for special groups of
                        muscles are not, as was formerly supposed, arranged irregularly and
                        fortuitously, but that on the contrary the nerve fibres to a particular
                        group of muscles have a typical and practically constant position within
                        the nerve.

                        In the large nerve-trunks of the limbs he has worked out the exact
                        position of the bundles for the various groups of muscles, so that in a
                        cross section of a particular nerve the component bundles can be
                        labelled as confidently and accurately as can be the cortical areas in
                        the brain. In the living subject, by using a fine needle-like electrode
                        and a very weak galvanic current, he has been able to differentiate the
                        nerve bundles for the various groups of muscles. In several cases of
                        spastic paralysis he succeeded in picking out in the nerve-trunk of the
                        affected limb the nerve bundles supplying the spastic muscles, and, by
                        resecting portions of them, in relieving the spasm. In a case of spastic
                        contracture of the pronator muscles of the forearm, for example, an
                        incision is made along the line of the median nerve above the bend of
                        the elbow. At the lateral side of the median nerve, where it lies in
                        contact with the biceps muscle, is situated a well-defined and easily
                        isolated bundle of fibres which supplies the pronator teres, the flexor
                        carpi radialis, and the palmaris longus muscles. On incising the sheath
                        of the nerve this bundle can be readily dissected up and its identity
                        confirmed by stimulating it with a very weak galvanic current. An inch
                        or more of the bundle is then resected.


                        INJURIES OF NERVES

                        Nerves are liable to be cut or torn across, bruised, compressed,
                        stretched, or torn away from their connections with the spinal medulla.

                        #Complete Division of a Mixed Nerve.#--Complete division is a common
                        result of accidental wounds, especially above the wrist, where the
                        ulnar, median, and radial nerves are frequently cut across, and in
                        gun-shot injuries.

                        _Changes in Structure and Function._--The mere interruption of the
                        continuity of a nerve results in degeneration of its fibres, the myelin
                        being broken up into droplets and absorbed, while the axis cylinders
                        swell up, disintegrate, and finally disappear. Both the conducting and
                        the insulating elements are thus lost. The degeneration in the central
                        end of the divided nerve is usually limited to the immediate proximity
                        of the lesion, and does not even involve all the nerve fibres. In the
                        distal end, it extends throughout the entire peripheral distribution of
                        the nerve, and appears to be due to the cutting off of the fibres from
                        their trophic nerve cells in the spinal medulla. Immediate suturing of
                        the ends does not affect the degeneration of the distal segment. The
                        peripheral end undergoes complete degeneration in from six weeks to two
                        months.

                        The physiological effects of complete division are that the muscles
                        supplied by the nerve are immediately paralysed, the area to which it
                        furnishes the sole cutaneous supply becomes insensitive, and the other
                        structures, including tendons, bones, and joints, lose sensation, and
                        begin to atrophy from loss of the trophic influence.

                        #Nerves divided in Amputation.#--In the case of nerves divided in an
                        amputation, there is an active, although necessarily abortive, attempt
                        at regeneration, which results in the formation of bulbous swellings at
                        the cut ends of the nerves. When there has been suppuration, and
                        especially if the nerves have been cut so as to be exposed in the wound,
                        these bulbous swellings may attain an abnormal size, and are then known
                        as "amputation" or "stump neuromas" (Fig. 84).

                        When the nerves in a stump have not been cut sufficiently short, they
                        may become involved in the cicatrix, and it may be necessary, on account
                        of pain, to free them from their adhesions, and to resect enough of the
                        terminal portions to prevent them again becoming adherent. When this is
                        difficult, a portion may be resected from each of the nerve-trunks at a
                        higher level; and if this fails to give relief, a fresh amputation may
                        be performed. When there is agonising pain dependent upon an ascending
                        neuritis, it may be necessary to resect the corresponding posterior
                        nerve roots within the vertebral canal.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 84.--Stump Neuromas of Sciatic Nerve, excised forty
                        years after the original amputation by Mr. A. G. Miller.]

                        #Other Injuries of Nerves.#--_Contusion_ of a nerve-trunk is attended
                        with extravasation of blood into the connective-tissue sheaths, and is
                        followed by degeneration of the contused nerve fibres. Function is
                        usually restored, the conducting paths being re-established by the
                        formation of new nerve fibres.

                        When a nerve is _torn across_ or badly _crushed_--as, for example, by a
                        fractured bone--the changes are similar to those in a divided nerve, and
                        the ultimate result depends on the amount of separation between the ends
                        and the possibility of the young axis cylinders bridging the gap.

                        _Involvement of Nerves in Scar Tissue._--Pressure or traction may be
                        exerted upon a nerve by contracting scar tissue, or a process of
                        neuritis or perineuritis may be induced.

                        When terminal filaments are involved in a scar, it is best to dissect
                        out the scar, and along with it the ends of the nerves pressed upon.
                        When a nerve-trunk, such as the sciatic, is involved in cicatricial
                        tissue, the nerve must be exposed and freed from its surroundings
                        (_neurolysis_), and then stretched so as to tear any adhesions that may
                        be present above or below the part exposed. It may be advisable to
                        displace the liberated nerve from its original position so as to
                        minimise the risk of its incorporation in the scar of the original wound
                        or in that resulting from the operation--for example, the radial nerve
                        may be buried in the substance of the triceps, or it may be surrounded
                        by a segment of vein or portion of fat-bearing fascia.

                        _Injuries of nerves resulting from_ #gun-shot wounds# include: (1) those
                        in which the nerve is directly damaged by the bullet, and (2) those in
                        which the nerve-trunk is involved secondarily either by scar tissue in
                        its vicinity or by callus following fracture of an adjacent bone. The
                        primary injuries include contusion, partial or complete division, and
                        perforation of the nerve-trunk. One of the most constant symptoms is the
                        early occurrence of severe neuralgic pain, and this is usually
                        associated with marked hyperaesthesia.

                        #Regeneration.#--_Process of Repair when the Ends are in Contact._--_If
                        the wound is aseptic_, and the ends of the divided nerve are sutured or
                        remain in contact, they become united, and the conducting paths are
                        re-established by a regeneration of nerve fibres. There is a difference
                        of opinion as to the method of regeneration. The Wallerian doctrine is
                        that the axis cylinders in the central end grow downwards, and enter the
                        nerve sheaths of the distal portion, and continue growing until they
                        reach the peripheral terminations in muscle and skin, and in course of
                        time acquire a myelin sheath; the cells of the neurolemma multiply and
                        form long chains in both ends of the nerve, and are believed to provide
                        for the nourishment and support of the actively lengthening axis
                        cylinders. Another view is that the formation of new axis cylinders is
                        not confined to the central end, but that it goes on also in the
                        peripheral segment, in which, however, the new axis cylinders do not
                        attain maturity until continuity with the central end has been
                        re-established.

                        _If the wound becomes infected_ and suppuration occurs, the young nerve
                        fibres are destroyed and efficient regeneration is prevented; the
                        formation of scar tissue also may constitute a permanent obstacle to new
                        nerve fibres bridging the gap.

                        _When the ends are not in contact_, reunion of the divided nerve fibres
                        does not take place whether the wound is infected or not. At the
                        proximal end there forms a bulbous swelling, which becomes adherent to
                        the scar tissue. It consists of branching axis cylinders running in all
                        directions, these having failed to reach the distal end because of the
                        extent of the gap. The peripheral end is completely degenerated, and is
                        represented by a fibrous cord, the cut end of which is often slightly
                        swollen or bulbous, and is also incorporated with the scar tissue of
                        the wound.

                        #Clinical Features.#--The symptoms resulting from division and non-union
                        of a nerve-trunk necessarily vary with the functions of the affected
                        nerve. The following description refers to a mixed sensori-motor trunk,
                        such as the median or radial (musculo-spiral) nerve.

                        _Sensory Phenomena._--Superficial touch is tested by means of a wisp of
                        cotton wool stroked gently across the skin; the capacity of
                        discriminating two points as separate, by a pair of blunt-pointed
                        compasses; the sensation of pressure, by means of a pencil or other
                        blunt object; of pain, by pricking or scratching with a needle; and of
                        sensibility to heat and cold, by test-tubes containing water at
                        different temperatures. While these tests are being carried out, the
                        patient's eyes are screened off.

                        After division of a nerve containing sensory fibres, there is an area of
                        absolute cutaneous insensibility to touch (anaesthesia), to pain
                        (analgesia), and to all degrees of temperature--_loss of protopathic
                        sensibility_; surrounded by an area in which there is loss of sensation
                        to light touch, inability to recognise minor differences of temperature
                        (72 o-104 o F.), and to appreciate as separate impressions the contact of
                        the two points of a compass--_loss of epicritic sensibility_ (Head and
                        Sherren) (Figs. 91, 92).

                        _Motor Phenomena._--There is immediate and complete loss of voluntary
                        power in the muscles supplied by the divided nerve. The muscles rapidly
                        waste, and within from three to five days, they cease to react to the
                        faradic current. When tested with the galvanic current, it is found that
                        a stronger current must be used to call forth contraction than in a
                        healthy muscle, and the contraction appears first at the closing of the
                        circuit when the anode is used as the testing electrode. The loss of
                        excitability to the interrupted current, and the specific alteration in
                        the type of contraction with the constant current, is known as the
                        _reaction of degeneration_. After a few weeks all electric excitability
                        is lost. The paralysed muscles undergo fatty degeneration, which attains
                        its maximum three or four months after the division of the nerve.
                        Further changes may take place, and result in the transformation of the
                        muscle into fibrous tissue, which by undergoing shortening may cause
                        deformity known as _paralytic contracture_.

                        _Vaso-motor Phenomena._--In the majority of cases there is an initial
                        rise in the temperature of the part (2 o to 3 o F.), with redness and
                        increased vascularity. This is followed by a fall in the local
                        temperature, which may amount to 8 o or 10 o F., the parts becoming pale
                        and cold. Sometimes the hyperaemia resulting from vaso-motor paralysis is
                        more persistent, and is associated with swelling of the parts from
                        oedema--the so-called _angio-neurotic oedema_. The vascularity varies with
                        external influences, and in cold weather the parts present a bluish
                        appearance.

                        _Trophic Phenomena._--Owing to the disappearance of the subcutaneous
                        fat, the skin is smooth and thin, and may be abnormally dry. The hair is
                        harsh, dry, and easily shed. The nails become brittle and furrowed, or
                        thick and curved, and the ends of the fingers become club-shaped. Skin
                        eruptions, especially in the form of blisters, occur, or there may be
                        actual ulcers of the skin, especially in winter. In aggravated cases the
                        tips of the fingers disappear from progressive ulceration, and in the
                        sole of the foot a perforating ulcer may develop. Arthropathies are
                        occasionally met with, the joints becoming the seat of a painless
                        effusion or hydrops, which is followed by fibrous thickening of the
                        capsular and other ligaments, and terminates in stiffness and fibrous
                        ankylosis. In this way the fingers are seriously crippled and deformed.

                        #Treatment of Divided Nerves.#--The treatment consists in approximating
                        the divided ends of the nerve and placing them under the most favourable
                        conditions for repair, and this should be done at the earliest possible
                        opportunity. (_Op. Surg._, pp. 45, 46.)

                        #Primary Suture.#--The reunion of a recently divided nerve is spoken of
                        as primary suture, and for its success asepsis is essential. As the
                        suturing of the ends of the nerve is extremely painful, an anaesthetic is
                        required.

                        When the wound is healed and while waiting for the restoration of
                        function, measures are employed to maintain the nutrition of the damaged
                        nerve and of the parts supplied by it. The limb is exercised, massaged,
                        and douched, and protected from cold and other injurious influences. The
                        nutrition of the paralysed muscles is further improved by electricity.
                        The galvanic current is employed, using at first a mild current of not
                        more than 5 milliamperes for about ten minutes, the current being made
                        to flow downwards in the course of the nerve, with the positive
                        electrode applied to the spine, and the negative over the affected nerve
                        near its termination. It is an advantage to have a metronome in the
                        circuit whereby the current is opened and closed automatically at
                        intervals, so as to cause contraction of the muscles.

                        _The results_ of primary suture, when it has been performed under
                        favourable conditions, are usually satisfactory. In a series of cases
                        investigated by Head and Sherren, the period between the operation and
                        the first return of sensation averaged 65 days. According to Purves
                        Stewart protopathic sensation commences to appear in about six weeks and
                        is completely restored in six months; electric sensation and motor power
                        reappear together in about six months, and restoration is complete in a
                        year. When sensation returns, the area of insensibility to pain steadily
                        diminishes and disappears; sensibility to extremes of temperature
                        appears soon after; and last of all, after a considerable interval,
                        there is simultaneous return of appreciation of light touch, moderate
                        degrees of temperature, and the points of a compass.

                        A clinical means of estimating how regeneration in a divided nerve is
                        progressing has been described by Tinel. He found that a tingling
                        sensation, similar to that experienced in the foot, when it is
                        recovering from the "sleeping" condition induced by prolonged pressure
                        on the sciatic nerve from sitting on a hard bench, can be elicited on
                        percussing over _growing_ axis cylinders. Tapping over the proximal end
                        of a _newly divided nerve_, _e.g._ the common peroneal behind the head
                        of the fibula, produces no tingling, but when in about three weeks
                        axis cylinders begin to grow in the proximal end-bulb, local tingling is
                        induced by tapping there. The downward growth of the axis cylinders can
                        be traced by tapping over the distal segment of the nerve, the tingling
                        sensation being elicited as far down as the young axis cylinders have
                        reached. When the regeneration of the axis cylinders is complete,
                        tapping no longer causes tingling. It usually takes about one hundred
                        days for this stage to be reached.

                        Tinel's sign is present before voluntary movement, muscular tone, or the
                        normal electrical reactions reappear.

                        In cases of complete nerve paralysis that have not been operated upon,
                        the tingling test is helpful in determining whether or not regeneration
                        is taking place. Its detection may prevent an unnecessary operation
                        being performed.

                        Primary suture should not be attempted so long as the wound shows signs
                        of infection, as it is almost certain to end in failure. The ends should
                        be sutured, however, as soon as the wound is aseptic or has healed.

                        #Secondary Suture.#--The term secondary suture is applied to the
                        operation of stitching the ends of the divided nerve after the wound has
                        healed.

                        _Results of Secondary Suture._--When secondary suture has been performed
                        under favourable conditions, the prognosis is good, but a longer time is
                        required for restoration of function than after primary suture. Purves
                        Stewart says protopathic sensation is sometimes observed much earlier
                        than in primary suture, because partial regeneration of axis cylinders
                        in the peripheral segment has already taken place. Sensation is
                        recovered first, but it seldom returns before three or four months.
                        There then follows an improvement or disappearance of any trophic
                        disturbances that may be present. Recovery of motion may be deferred for
                        long periods--rather because of the changes in the muscles than from
                        want of conductivity in the nerve--and if the muscles have undergone
                        complete degeneration, it may never take place at all. While waiting for
                        recovery, every effort should be made to maintain the nutrition of the
                        damaged nerve, and of the parts which it supplies.

                        When suture is found to be impossible, recourse must be had to other
                        methods, known as nerve bridging and nerve implantation.

                        #Incomplete Division of a Mixed Nerve.#--The effects of partial division
                        of a mixed nerve vary according to the destination of the nerve bundles
                        that have been interrupted. Within their area of distribution the
                        paralysis is as complete as if the whole trunk had been cut across. The
                        uninjured nerve-bundles continue to transmit impulses with the result
                        that there is a _dissociated paralysis_ within the distribution of the
                        affected nerve, some muscles continuing to act and to respond normally
                        to electric stimulation, while others behave as if the whole nerve-trunk
                        had been severed.

                        In addition to vasomotor and trophic changes, there is often severe pain
                        of a burning kind (_causalgia_ or _thermalgia_) which comes on about a
                        fortnight after the injury and causes intense and continuous suffering
                        which may last for months. Paroxysms of pain may be excited by the
                        slightest touch or by heat, and the patient usually learns for himself
                        that the constant application of cold wet cloths allays the pain. The
                        thermalgic area sweats profusely.

                        Operative treatment is indicated where there is no sign of improvement
                        within three months, when recovery is arrested before complete
                        restoration of function is attained, or when thermalgic pain is
                        excessive.

                        #Subcutaneous Injuries of Nerves.#--Several varieties of subcutaneous
                        injuries of nerves are met with. One of the best known is the
                        compression paralysis of the nerves of the upper arm which results from
                        sleeping with the arm resting on the back of a chair or the edge of a
                        table--the so-called "drunkard's palsy"; and from the pressure of a
                        crutch in the axilla--"crutch paralysis." In some of these injuries,
                        notably "drunkard's palsy," the disability appears to be due not to
                        damage of the nerve, but to overstretching of the extensors of the wrist
                        and fingers (Jones). A similar form of paralysis is sometimes met with
                        from the pressure of a tourniquet, from tight bandages or splints, from
                        the pressure exerted by a dislocated bone or by excessive callus, and
                        from hyper-extension of the arm during anaesthesia.

                        In all these forms there is impaired sensation, rarely amounting to
                        anaesthesia, marked muscular wasting, and diminution or loss of voluntary
                        motor power, while--and this is a point of great importance--the normal
                        electrical reactions are preserved. There may also develop trophic
                        changes such as blisters, superficial ulcers, and clubbing of the tips
                        of the fingers. The prognosis is usually favourable, as recovery is the
                        rule within from one to three months. If, however, neuritis supervenes,
                        the electrical reactions are altered, the muscles degenerate, and
                        recovery may be retarded or may fail to take place.

                        Injuries which act abruptly or instantaneously are illustrated in the
                        crushing of a nerve by the sudden displacement of a sharp-edged fragment
                        of bone, as may occur in comminuted fractures of the humerus. The
                        symptoms include perversion or loss of sensation, motor paralysis, and
                        atrophy of muscles, which show the reaction of degeneration from the
                        eighth day onwards. The presence of the reaction of degeneration
                        influences both the prognosis and the treatment, for it implies a lesion
                        which is probably incapable of spontaneous recovery, and which can only
                        be remedied by operation.

                        The _treatment_ varies with the cause and nature of the lesion. When,
                        for example, a displaced bone or a mass of callus is pressing upon the
                        nerve, steps must be taken to relieve the pressure, by operation if
                        necessary. When there is reason to believe that the nerve is severely
                        crushed or torn across, it should be exposed by incision, and, after
                        removal of the damaged ends, should be united by sutures. When it is
                        impossible to make a definite diagnosis as to the state of the nerve, it
                        is better to expose it by operation, and thus learn the exact state of
                        affairs without delay; in the event of the nerve being torn, the ends
                        should be united by sutures.

                        #Dislocation of Nerves.#--This injury, which resembles the dislocation
                        of tendons from their grooves, is seldom met with except in the ulnar
                        nerve at the elbow, and is described with injuries of that nerve.


                        DISEASES OF NERVES

                        #Traumatic Neuritis.#--This consists in an overgrowth of the
                        connective-tissue framework of a nerve, which causes irritation and
                        pressure upon the nerve fibres, sometimes resulting in their
                        degeneration. It may originate in connection with a wound in the
                        vicinity of a nerve, as, for example, when the brachial nerves are
                        involved in scar tissue subsequent to an operation for clearing out the
                        axilla for cancer; or in contusion and compression of a nerve--for
                        example, by the pressure of the head of the humerus in a dislocation of
                        the shoulder. Some weeks or months after the injury, the patient
                        complains of increasing hyperaesthesia and of neuralgic pains in the
                        course of the nerve. The nerve is very sensitive to pressure, and, if
                        superficial, may be felt to be swollen. The associated muscles are
                        wasted and weak, and are subject to twitchings. There are also trophic
                        disturbances. It is rare to have complete sensory and motor paralysis.
                        The disease is commonest in the nerves of the upper extremity, and the
                        hand may become crippled and useless.

                        _Treatment._--Any constitutional condition which predisposes to
                        neuritis, such as gout, diabetes, or syphilis, must receive appropriate
                        treatment. The symptoms may be relieved by rest and by soothing
                        applications, such as belladonna, ichthyol, or menthol, by the use of
                        hot-air and electric baths, and in obstinate cases by blistering or by
                        the application of Corrigan's button. When such treatment fails the
                        nerve may be stretched, or, in the case of a purely sensory trunk, a
                        portion may be excised. Local causes, such as involvement of the nerve
                        in a scar or in adhesions, may afford indications for operative
                        treatment.

                        #Multiple Peripheral Neuritis.#--Although this disease mainly comes
                        under the cognizance of the physician, it may be attended with phenomena
                        which call for surgical interference. In this country it is commonly due
                        to alcoholism, but it may result from diabetes or from chronic poisoning
                        with lead or arsenic, or from bacterial infections and intoxications
                        such as occur in diphtheria, gonorrhoea, syphilis, leprosy, typhoid,
                        influenza, beri-beri, and many other diseases.

                        It is, as a rule, widely distributed throughout the peripheral nerves,
                        but the distribution frequently varies with the cause--the alcoholic
                        form, for example, mainly affecting the legs, the diphtheritic form the
                        soft palate and pharynx, and that associated with lead poisoning the
                        forearms. The essential lesion is a degeneration of the conducting
                        fibres of the affected nerves, and the prominent symptoms are the result
                        of this. In alcoholic neuritis there is great tenderness of the muscles.
                        When the legs are affected the patient may be unable to walk, and the
                        toes may droop and the heel be drawn up, resulting in one variety of pes
                        equino-varus. Pressure sores and perforating ulcer of the foot are the
                        most important trophic phenomena.

                        Apart from the medical _treatment_, measures must be taken to prevent
                        deformity, especially when the legs are affected. The bedclothes are
                        supported by a cage, and the foot maintained at right angles to the leg
                        by sand-bags or splints. When the disease is subsiding, the nutrition of
                        the damaged nerves and muscles should be maintained by massage, baths,
                        passive movements, and the use of the galvanic current. When deformity
                        has been allowed to take place, operative measures may be required for
                        its correction.


                        NEUROMA[5]

                        [5] We have followed the classification adopted by Alexis Thomson in his
                        work _On Neuroma, and Neuro-fibromatosis_ (Edinburgh: 1900).

                        Neuroma is a clinical term applied to all tumours, irrespective of their
                        structure, which have their seat in nerves.

                        A tumour composed of newly formed nerve tissue is spoken of as a #true
                        neuroma#; when ganglionic cells are present in addition to nerve fibres,
                        the name _ganglionic neuroma_ is applied. These tumours are rare, and
                        are chiefly met with in the main cords or abdominal plexuses of the
                        sympathetic system of children or young adults. They are quite
                        insensitive, and their removal is only called for if they cause pain or
                        show signs of malignancy.

                        A #false neuroma# is an overgrowth of the sheath of a nerve. This
                        overgrowth may result in the formation of a circumscribed tumour, or may
                        take the form of a diffuse fibromatosis.

                        _The circumscribed or solitary tumour_ grows from the sheath of a nerve
                        which is otherwise healthy, and it may be innocent or malignant.

                        _The innocent_ form is usually fibrous or myxomatous, and is definitely
                        encapsulated. It may become cystic as a result of haemorrhage or of
                        myxomatous degeneration. It grows very slowly, is usually elliptical in
                        shape, and the solid form is rarely larger than a hazel-nut. The nerve
                        fibres may be spread out all round the tumour, or may run only on one
                        side of it. When subcutaneous and related to the smaller unnamed
                        cutaneous nerves, it is known as a _painful subcutaneous nodule_ or
                        _tubercle_. It is chiefly met with about the ankle, and most often in
                        women. It is remarkably sensitive, even gentle handling causing intense
                        pain, which usually radiates to the periphery of the nerve affected.
                        When related to a deeper, named nerve-trunk, it is known as a
                        _trunk-neuroma_. It is usually less sensitive than the "subcutaneous
                        nodule," and rarely gives rise to motor symptoms unless it involves the
                        nerve roots where they pass through bony canals.

                        A trunk-neuroma is recognised clinically by its position in the line of
                        a nerve, by the fact that it is movable in the transverse axis of the
                        nerve but not in its long axis, and by being unduly painful and
                        sensitive.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 85.--Amputation Stump of Upper Arm, showing bulbous
                        thickening of the ends of the nerves, embedded in scar tissue at the
                        apex of the stamp.]

                        _Treatment._--If the tumour causes suffering it should be removed,
                        preferably by shelling it out from the investing nerve sheath or
                        capsule. In the subcutaneous nodule the nerve is rarely recognisable,
                        and is usually sacrificed. When removal of the tumour is incomplete, a
                        tube of radium should be inserted into the cavity, to prevent recurrence
                        of the tumour in a malignant form.

                        _The malignant neuroma_ is a sarcoma growing from the sheath of a nerve.
                        It has the same characters and clinical features as the innocent
                        variety, only it grows more rapidly, and by destroying the nerve fibres
                        causes motor symptoms--jerkings followed by paralysis. The sarcoma tends
                        to spread along the lymph spaces in the long axis of the nerve, as well
                        as to implicate the surrounding tissues, and it is liable to give rise
                        to secondary growths. The malignant neuroma is met with chiefly in the
                        sciatic and other large nerves of the limbs.

                        The _treatment_ is conducted on the same lines as sarcoma in other
                        situations; the insertion of a tube of radium after removal of the
                        tumour diminishes the tendency to recurrence; a portion of the
                        nerve-trunk being sacrificed, means must be taken to bridge the gap. In
                        inoperable cases it may be possible to relieve pain by excising a
                        portion of the nerve above the tumour, or, when this is impracticable,
                        by resecting the posterior nerve roots and their ganglia within the
                        vertebral canal.

                        The so-called _amputation neuroma_ has already been referred to (p. 344).

                        _Diffuse or Generalised Neuro-Fibromatosis--Recklinghausen's
                        Disease._--These terms are now used to include what were formerly known
                        as "multiple neuromata," as well as certain other overgrowths related to
                        nerves. The essential lesion is an overgrowth of the endoneural
                        connective tissue throughout the nerves of both the cerebro-spinal and
                        sympathetic systems. The nerves are diffusely and unequally thickened,
                        so that small twigs may become enlarged to the size of the median, while
                        at irregular intervals along their course the connective-tissue
                        overgrowth is exaggerated so as to form tumour-like swellings similar to
                        the trunk-neuroma already described. The tumours, which vary greatly in
                        size and number--as many as a thousand have been counted in one
                        case--are enclosed in a capsule derived from the perineurium. The
                        fibromatosis may also affect the cranial nerves, the ganglia on the
                        posterior nerve roots, the nerves within the vertebral canal, and the
                        sympathetic nerves and ganglia, as well as the continuations of the
                        motor nerves within the muscles. The nerve fibres, although mechanically
                        displaced and dissociated by the overgrown endoneurium, undergo no
                        structural change except when compressed in passing through a bony
                        canal.

                        The disease probably originates before birth, although it may not make
                        its appearance till adolescence or even till adult life. It is sometimes
                        met with in several members of one family. It is recognised clinically
                        by the presence of multiple tumours in the course of the nerves, and
                        sometimes by palpable enlargement of the superficial nerve-trunks
                        (Fig. 86). The tumours resemble the solitary trunk-neuroma, are usually
                        quite insensitive, and many of them are unknown to the patient. As a
                        result of injury or other exciting cause, however, one or other tumour
                        may increase in size and become extremely sensitive; the pain is then
                        agonising; it is increased by handling, and interferes with sleep. In
                        these conditions, a malignant transformation of the fibroma into sarcoma
                        is to be suspected. Motor disturbances are exceptional, unless in the
                        case of tumours within the vertebral canal, which press on the spinal
                        medulla and cause paraplegia.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 86.--Diffuse enlargement of Nerves in generalised
                        Neuro-fibromatosis.

                        (After R. W. Smith.)]

                        Neuro-fibromatosis is frequently accompanied by _pigmentation of the
                        skin_ in the form of brown spots or patches scattered over the trunk.

                        The disease is often stationary for long periods. In progressive cases
                        the patient becomes exhausted, and usually dies of some intercurrent
                        affection, particularly phthisis. The treatment is restricted to
                        relieving symptoms and complications; removal of one of the tumours is
                        to be strongly deprecated.

                        In a considerable proportion of cases one of the multiple tumours takes
                        on the characters of a malignant growth ("secondary malignant neuroma,"
                        Garre). This malignant transformation may follow upon injury, or on an
                        unsuccessful attempt to remove the tumour. The features are those of a
                        rapidly growing sarcoma involving a nerve-trunk, with agonising pain
                        and muscular cramps, followed by paralysis from destruction of the
                        nerve fibres. The removal of the tumour is usually followed by
                        recurrence, so that high amputation is the only treatment to be
                        recommended. Metastasis to internal organs is exceptional.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 87.--Plexiform Neuroma of small Sciatic Nerve, from
                        a girl aet. 16.

                        (Mr. Annandale's case.)]

                        There are other types of neuro-fibromatosis which require brief mention.

                        _The plexiform neuroma_ (Fig. 87) is a fibromatosis confined to the
                        distribution of one or more contiguous nerves or of a plexus of nerves,
                        and it may occur either by itself or along with multiple tumours of the
                        nerve-trunks and with pigmentation of the skin. The clinical features
                        are those of an ill-defined swelling composed of a number of tortuous,
                        convoluted cords, lying in a loose areolar tissue and freely movable on
                        one another. It is rarely the seat of pain or tenderness. It most often
                        appears in the early years of life, sometimes in relation to a pigmented
                        or hairy mole. It is of slow growth, may remain stationary for long
                        periods, and has little or no tendency to become malignant. It is
                        usually subcutaneous, and is frequently situated on the head or neck in
                        the distribution of the trigeminal or superficial cervical nerves. There
                        is no necessity for its removal, but this may be indicated because of
                        disfigurement, especially on the face or scalp or because its bulk
                        interferes with function. When involving the ophthalmic division of the
                        trigeminus, for example, it may cause enlargement of the upper lid and
                        proptosis, with danger to the function of the globe. The results of
                        excision are usually satisfactory, even if the removal is not complete.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 88.--Multiple Neuro-fibromas of Skin (Molluscum
                        fibrosum, or Recklinghausen's disease).]

                        _The cutaneous neuro-fibroma_ or _molluscum fibrosum_ has been shown by
                        Recklinghausen to be a soft fibroma related to the terminal filaments of
                        one of the cutaneous nerves (Fig. 88). The disease appears in the form
                        of multiple, soft, projecting tumours, scattered all over the body,
                        except the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. The tumours are of
                        all sizes, some being no larger than a pin's head, whilst many are as
                        big as a filbert and a few even larger. Many are sessile and others are
                        distinctly pedunculated, but all are covered with skin. They are mobile,
                        soft to the touch, and of the consistence of firm fat. In exceptional
                        cases one of the skin tumours may attain an enormous size and cause a
                        hideous deformity, hanging down by its own weight in lobulated or folded
                        masses (pachy-dermatocele). The treatment consists in removing the
                        larger swellings. In some cases molluscum fibrosum is associated with
                        pigmentation of the skin and with multiple tumours of the nerve-trunks.
                        The small multiple tumours rarely call for interference.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 89.--Elephantiasis Neuromatosa in a woman aet. 28]

                        _Elephantiasis neuromatosa_ is the name applied by Virchow to a
                        condition in which a limb is swollen and misshapen as a result of the
                        extension of a neuro-fibromatosis to the skin and subcutaneous cellular
                        tissue of the extremity as a whole (Fig. 89). It usually begins in early
                        life without apparent cause, and it may be associated with multiple
                        tumours of the nerve-trunks. The inconvenience caused by the bulk and
                        weight of the limb may justify its removal.


                        SURGERY OF THE INDIVIDUAL NERVES[6]

                        [6] We desire here to acknowledge our indebtedness to Mr. James
                        Sherren's work on _Injuries of Nerves and their Treatment_.

                        #The Brachial Plexus.#--Lesions of the brachial plexus may be divided
                        into those above the clavicle and those below that bone.

                        In the #supra-clavicular injuries#, the violence applied to the head or
                        shoulder causes over-stretching of the anterior branches (primary
                        divisions) of the cervical nerves, the fifth, or the fifth and sixth
                        being those most liable to suffer. Sometimes the traction is exerted
                        upon the plexus from below, as when a man in falling from a height
                        endeavours to save himself by clutching at some projection, and the
                        lesion then mainly affects the first dorsal nerve. There is tearing of
                        the nerve sheaths, with haemorrhage, but in severe cases partial or
                        complete severance of nerve fibres may occur and these give way at
                        different levels. During the healing process an excess of fibrous tissue
                        is formed, which may interfere with regeneration.

                        _Post-anaesthetic paralysis_ occurs in patients in whom, during the
                        course of an operation, the arm is abducted and rotated laterally or
                        extended above the head, causing over-stretching of the plexus,
                        especially of the fifth, or fifth and sixth, anterior branches.

                        A _cervical rib_ may damage the plexus by direct pressure, the part
                        usually affected being the medial cord, which is made up of fibres from
                        the eighth cervical and first dorsal nerves.

                        When a lesion of the plexus complicates a _fracture of the clavicle_,
                        the nerve injury is due, not to pressure on or laceration of the nerves
                        by fragments of bone, but to the violence causing the fracture, and this
                        is usually applied to the point of the shoulder.

                        Penetrating _wounds_, apart from those met with in military practice,
                        are rare.

                        In the #infra-clavicular injuries#, the lesion most often results from
                        the pressure of the dislocated head of the humerus; occasionally from
                        attempts made to reduce the dislocation by the heel-in-the-axilla
                        method, or from fracture of the upper end of the humerus or of the neck
                        of the scapula. The whole plexus may suffer, but more frequently the
                        medial cord is alone implicated.

                        _Clinical Features._--Three types of lesion result from indirect
                        violence: the whole plexus; the upper-arm type; and the lower-arm type.

                        _When the whole plexus is involved_, sensibility is lost over the entire
                        forearm and hand and over the lateral surface of the arm in its distal
                        two-thirds. All the muscles of the arm, forearm, and hand are paralysed,
                        and, as a rule, also the pectorals and spinati, but the rhomboids and
                        serratus anterior escape. There is paralysis of the sympathetic fibres
                        to the eye and orbit, with narrowing of the palpebral fissure, recession
                        of the globe, and the pupil is slow to dilate when shaded from the
                        light.

                        The _upper-arm type_--Erb-Duchenne paralysis--is that most frequently
                        met with, and it is due to a lesion of the fifth anterior branch, or, it
                        may be, also of the sixth. The position of the upper limb is typical:
                        the arm and forearm hang close to the side, with the forearm extended
                        and pronated; the deltoid, spinati, biceps, brachialis, and supinators
                        are paralysed, and in some cases the radial extensors of the wrist and
                        the pronator teres are also affected. The patient is unable to supinate
                        the forearm or to abduct the arm, and in most cases to flex the forearm.
                        He may, however, regain some power of flexing the forearm when it is
                        fully pronated, the extensors of the wrist becoming feeble flexors of
                        the elbow. There is, as a rule, no loss of sensibility, but complaint
                        may be made of tickling and of pins-and-needles over the lateral aspect
                        of the arm. The abnormal position of the limb may persist although the
                        muscles regain the power of voluntary movement, and as the condition
                        frequently follows a fall on the shoulder, great care is necessary in
                        diagnosis, as the condition is apt to be attributed to an injury to the
                        axillary (circumflex) nerve.

                        The _lower-arm type_ of paralysis, associated with the name of Klumpke,
                        is usually due to over-stretching of the plexus, and especially affects
                        the anterior branch of the first dorsal nerve. In typical cases all the
                        intrinsic muscles of the hand are affected, and the hand assumes the
                        claw shape. Sensibility is usually altered over the medial side of the
                        arm and forearm, and there is paralysis of the sympathetic.

                        _Infra-clavicular injuries_, as already stated, are most often produced
                        by a sub-coracoid dislocation of the humerus; the medial cord is that
                        most frequently injured, and the muscles paralysed are those supplied by
                        the ulnar nerve, with, in addition, those intrinsic muscles of the hand
                        supplied by the median. Sensibility is affected over the medial surface
                        of the forearm and ulnar area of the hand. Injury of the lateral and
                        posterior cords is very rare.

                        _Treatment_ is carried out on the lines already laid down for nerve
                        injuries in general. It is impossible to diagnose between complete and
                        incomplete rupture of the nerve cords, until sufficient time has elapsed
                        to allow of the establishment of the reaction of degeneration. If this
                        is present at the end of fourteen days, operation should not be delayed.
                        Access to the cords of the plexus is obtained by a dissection similar to
                        that employed for the subclavian artery, and the nerves are sought for
                        as they emerge from under cover of the scalenus anterior, and are then
                        traced until the seat of injury is found. In the case of the first
                        dorsal nerve, it may be necessary temporarily to resect the clavicle.
                        The usual after-treatment must be persisted in until recovery ensues,
                        and care must be taken that the paralysed muscles do not become
                        over-stretched. The prognosis is less favourable in the supra-clavicular
                        lesions than in those below the clavicle, which nearly always recover
                        without surgical intervention.

                        In the _brachial birth-paralysis_ met with in infants, the lesion is due
                        to over-stretching of the plexus, and is nearly always of the
                        Erb-Duchenne type. The injury is usually unilateral, it occurs with
                        almost equal frequency in breech and in vertex presentations, and the
                        left arm is more often affected than the right. The lesion is seldom
                        recognised at birth. The first symptom noticed is tenderness in the
                        supra-clavicular region, the child crying when this part is touched or
                        the arm is moved. The attitude may be that of the Erb-Duchenne type, or
                        the whole of the muscles of the upper limb may be flaccid, and the arm
                        hangs powerless. A considerable proportion of the cases recover
                        spontaneously. The arm is to be kept at rest, with the affected muscles
                        relaxed, and, as soon as tenderness has disappeared, daily massage and
                        passive movements are employed. The reaction of degeneration can rarely
                        be satisfactorily tested before the child is three months old, but if it
                        is present, an operation should be performed. After operation, the
                        shoulder should be elevated so that no traction is exerted on the
                        affected cords.

                        #The long thoracic nerve# (nerve of Bell), which supplies the serratus
                        anterior, is rarely injured. In those whose occupation entails carrying
                        weights upon the shoulder it may be contused, and the resulting
                        paralysis of the serratus is usually combined with paralysis of the
                        lower part of the trapezius, the branches from the third and fourth
                        cervical nerves which supply this muscle also being exposed to pressure
                        as they pass across the root of the neck. There is complaint of pain
                        above the clavicle, and winging of the scapula; the patient is unable to
                        raise the arm in front of the body above the level of the shoulder or to
                        perform any forward pushing movements; on attempting either of these the
                        winging of the scapula is at once increased. If the scapula is compared
                        with that on the sound side, it is seen that, in addition to the lower
                        angle being more prominent, the spine is more horizontal and the lower
                        angle nearer the middle line. The majority of these cases recover if the
                        limb is placed at absolute rest, the elbow supported, and massage and
                        galvanism persevered with. If the paralysis persists, the sterno-costal
                        portion of the pectoralis major may be transplanted to the lower angle
                        of the scapula.

                        The long thoracic nerve may be cut across while clearing out the axilla
                        in operating for cancer of the breast. The displacement of the scapula
                        is not so marked as in the preceding type, and the patient is able to
                        perform pushing movements below the level of the shoulder. If the
                        reaction of degeneration develops, an operation may be performed, the
                        ends of the nerve being sutured, or the distal end grafted into the
                        posterior cord of the brachial plexus.

                        #The Axillary (Circumflex) Nerve.#--In the majority of cases in which
                        paralysis of the deltoid follows upon an injury of the shoulder, it is
                        due to a lesion of the fifth cervical nerve, as has already been
                        described in injuries of the brachial plexus. The axillary nerve itself
                        as it passes round the neck of the humerus is most liable to be injured
                        from the pressure of a crutch, or of the head of the humerus in
                        sub-glenoid dislocation, or in fracture of the neck of the scapula or of
                        the humerus. In miners, who work for long periods lying on the side, the
                        muscle may be paralysed by direct pressure on the terminal filaments of
                        the nerve, and the nerve may also be involved as a result of disease in
                        the sub-deltoid bursa.

                        The deltoid is wasted, and the acromion unduly prominent. In recent
                        cases paralysis of the muscle is easily detected. In cases of long
                        standing it is not so simple, because other muscles, the spinati, the
                        clavicular fibres of the pectoral and the serratus, take its place and
                        elevate the arm; there is always loss of sensation on the lateral aspect
                        of the shoulder. There is rarely any call for operative treatment, as
                        the paralysis is usually compensated for by other muscles.

                        When the _supra-scapular nerve_ is contused or stretched in injuries of
                        the shoulder, the spinati muscles are paralysed and wasted, the spine of
                        the scapula is unduly prominent, and there is impairment in the power of
                        abducting the arm and rotating it laterally.

                        The _musculo-cutaneous nerve_ is very rarely injured; when cut across,
                        there is paralysis of the coraco-brachialis, biceps, and part of the
                        brachialis, but no movements are abolished, the forearm being flexed, in
                        the pronated position, by the brachio-radialis and long radial extensor
                        of the wrist; in the supinated position, by that portion of the
                        brachialis supplied by the radial nerve. Supination is feebly performed
                        by the supinator muscle. Protopathic and epicritic sensibility are lost
                        over the radial side of the forearm.

                        #Radial (Musculo-Spiral) Nerve.#--From its anatomical relationships this
                        trunk is more exposed to injury than any other nerve in the body. It is
                        frequently compressed against the humerus in sleeping with the arm
                        resting on the back of a chair, especially in the deep sleep of
                        alcoholic intoxication (drunkard's palsy). It may be pressed upon by a
                        crutch in the axilla, by the dislocated head of the humerus, or by
                        violent compression of the arm, as when an elastic tourniquet is applied
                        too tightly. The most serious and permanent injuries of this nerve are
                        associated with fractures of the humerus, especially those from direct
                        violence attended with comminution of the bone. The nerve may be crushed
                        or torn by one of the fragments at the time of the injury, or at a later
                        period may be compressed by callus.

                        _Clinical Features._--Immediately after the injury it is impossible to
                        tell whether the nerve is torn across or merely compressed. The patient
                        may complain of numbness and tingling in the distribution of the
                        superficial branch of the nerve, but it is a striking fact, that so long
                        as the nerve is divided below the level at which it gives off the dorsal
                        cutaneous nerve of the forearm (external cutaneous branch), there is no
                        loss of sensation. When it is divided above the origin of the dorsal
                        cutaneous branch, or when the dorsal branch of the musculo-cutaneous
                        nerve is also divided, there is a loss of sensibility on the dorsum
                        of the hand.

                        The motor symptoms predominate, the muscles affected being the extensors
                        of the wrist and fingers, and the supinators. There is a characteristic
                        "drop-wrist"; the wrist is flexed and pronated, and the patient is
                        unable to dorsiflex the wrist or fingers (Fig. 90). If the hand and
                        proximal phalanges are supported, the second and third phalanges may be
                        partly extended by the interossei and lumbricals. There is also
                        considerable impairment of power in the muscles which antagonise those
                        that are paralysed, so that the grasp of the hand is feeble, and the
                        patient almost loses the use of it; in some cases this would appear to
                        be due to the median nerve having been injured at the same time.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 90.--Drop-wrist following Fracture of Shaft of
                        Humerus.]

                        If the lesion is high up, as it is, for example, in crutch paralysis,
                        the triceps and anconeus may also suffer.

                        _Treatment._--The slighter forms of injury by compression recover under
                        massage, douching, and electricity. If there is drop-wrist, the hand and
                        forearm are placed on a palmar splint, with the hand dorsiflexed to
                        nearly a right angle, and this position is maintained until voluntary
                        dorsiflexion at the wrist returns to the normal. Recovery is sometimes
                        delayed for several months.

                        In the more severe injuries associated with fracture of the humerus and
                        attended with the reaction of degeneration, it is necessary to cut down
                        upon the nerve and free it from the pressure of a fragment of bone or
                        from callus or adhesions. If the nerve is torn across, the ends must be
                        sutured, and if this is impossible owing to loss of tissue, the gap may
                        be bridged by a graft taken from the superficial branch of the radial
                        nerve, or the ends may be implanted into the median.

                        Finally, in cases in which the paralysis is permanent and incurable, the
                        disability may be relieved by operation. A fascial graft can be employed
                        to act as a ligament permanently extending the wrist; it is attached to
                        the third and fourth metacarpal bones distally and to the radius or ulna
                        proximally. The flexor carpi radialis can then be joined up with the
                        extensor digitorum communis by passing its tendon through an aperture in
                        the interosseous membrane, or better still, through the pronator
                        quadratus, as there is less likelihood of the formation of adhesions
                        when the tendon passes through muscle than through interosseous
                        membrane. The palmaris longus is anastomosed with the abductor pollicis
                        longus (extensor ossis metacarpi pollicis), thus securing a fair amount
                        of abduction of the thumb. The flexor carpi ulnaris may also be
                        anastomosed with the common extensor of the fingers. The extensors of
                        the wrist may be shortened, so as to place the hand in the position of
                        dorsal flexion, and thus improve the attitude and grasp of the hand.

                        _The superficial branch of the radial_ (radial nerve) _and the deep
                        branch_ (posterior interosseous), apart from suffering in lesions of the
                        radial, are liable to be contused or torn is dislocation of the head of
                        the radius, and in fracture of the neck of the bone. The deep branch may
                        be divided as it passes through the supinator in operations on old
                        fractures and dislocations in the region of the elbow. Division of the
                        superficial branch in the upper two-thirds of the forearm produces no
                        loss of sensibility; division in the lower third after the nerve has
                        become associated with branches from the musculo-cutaneous is followed
                        by a loss of sensibility on the radial side of the hand and thumb. Wounds
                        on the dorsal surface of the wrist and forearm are often followed by
                        loss of sensibility over a larger area, because the musculo-cutaneous
                        nerve is divided as well, and some of the fibres of the lower lateral
                        cutaneous branch of the radial.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 91.--To illustrate the Loss of Sensation produced by
                        Division of the Median Nerve. The area of complete cutaneous
                        insensibility is shaded black. The parts insensitive to light touch and
                        to intermediate degrees of temperature are enclosed within the dotted
                        line.

                        (After Head and Sherren.)]

                        #The Median Nerve# is most frequently injured in wounds made by broken
                        glass in the region of the wrist. It may also be injured in fractures of
                        the lower end of the humerus, in fractures of both bones of the forearm,
                        and as a result of pressure by splints. After _division at the elbow_,
                        there is impairment of mobility which affects the thumb, and to a less
                        extent the index finger: the terminal phalanx of the thumb cannot be
                        flexed owing to the paralysis of the flexor pollicis longus, and the
                        index can only be flexed at its metacarpo-phalangeal joint by the
                        interosseous muscles attached to it. Pronation of the forearm is feeble,
                        and is completed by the weight of the hand. After _division at the
                        wrist_, the abductor-opponens group of muscles and the two lateral
                        lumbricals only are affected; the abduction of the thumb can be feebly
                        imitated by the short extensor and the long abductor (ext. ossis
                        metacarpi pollicis), while opposition may be simulated by contraction of
                        the long flexor and the short abductor of the thumb; the paralysis of
                        the two medial lumbricals produces no symptoms that can be recognised.
                        It is important to remember that when the median nerve is divided at the
                        wrist, deep touch can be appreciated over the whole of the area
                        supplied by the nerve; the injury, therefore, is liable to be over
                        looked. If, however, the tendons are divided as well as the nerve, there
                        is insensibility to deep touch. The areas of epicritic and of
                        protopathic insensibility are illustrated in Fig. 91. The division of
                        the nerve at the elbow, or even at the axilla, does not increase the
                        extent of the loss of epicritic or protopathic sensibility, but usually
                        affects deep sensibility.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 92.--To illustrate Loss of Sensation produced by
                        complete Division of Ulnar Nerve. Loss of all forms of cutaneous
                        sensibility is represented by the shaded area. The parts insensitive to
                        light touch and to intermediate degrees of heat and cold are enclosed
                        within the dotted line.

                        (Head and Sherren.)]

                        #The Ulnar Nerve.#--The most common injury of this nerve is its division
                        in transverse accidental wounds just above the wrist. In the arm it may
                        be contused, along with the radial, in crutch paralysis; in the region
                        of the elbow it may be injured in fractures or dislocations, or it may
                        be accidentally divided in the operation for excising the elbow-joint.

                        When it is injured _at or above the elbow_, there is paralysis of the
                        flexor carpi ulnaris, the ulnar half of the flexor digitorum profundus,
                        all the interossei, the two medial lumbricals, and the adductors of the
                        thumb. The hand assumes a characteristic attitude: the index and middle
                        fingers are extended at the metacarpo-phalangeal joints owing to
                        paralysis of the interosseous muscles attached to them; the little and
                        ring fingers are hyper-extended at these joints in consequence of the
                        paralysis of the lumbricals; all the fingers are flexed at the
                        inter-phalangeal joints, the flexion being most marked in the little and
                        ring fingers--claw-hand or _main en griffe_. On flexing the wrist, the
                        hand is tilted to the radial side, but the paralysis of the flexor carpi
                        ulnaris is often compensated for by the action of the palmaris longus.
                        The little and ring fingers can be flexed to a slight degree by the
                        slips of the flexor sublimis attached to them and supplied by the median
                        nerve; flexion of the terminal phalanx of the little finger is almost
                        impossible. Adduction and abduction movements of the fingers are lost.
                        Adduction of the thumb is carried out, not by the paralysed adductor
                        pollicis, but the movement may be simulated by the long flexor and
                        extensor muscles of the thumb. Epicritic sensibility is lost over the
                        little finger, the ulnar half of the ring finger, and that part of the
                        palm and dorsum of the hand to the ulnar side of a line drawn
                        longitudinally through the ring finger and continued upwards.
                        Protopathic sensibility is lost over an area which varies in different
                        cases. Deep sensibility is usually lost over an area almost as extensive
                        as that of protopathic insensibility.

                        When the nerve is _divided at the wrist_, the adjacent tendons are also
                        frequently severed. If divided below the point at which its dorsal
                        branch is given off, the sensory paralysis is much less marked, and the
                        injury is therefore liable to be overlooked until the wasting of muscles
                        and typical _main en griffe_ ensue. The loss of sensibility after
                        division of the nerve before the dorsal branch is given off resembles
                        that after division at the elbow, except that in uncomplicated cases
                        deep sensibility is usually retained. If the tendons are divided as
                        well, however, deep touch is also lost.

                        Care must be taken in all these injuries to prevent deformity; a splint
                        must be worn, at least during the night, until the muscles regain their
                        power of voluntary movement, and then exercises should be instituted.

                        #Dislocation of the ulnar nerve# at the elbow results from sudden and
                        violent flexion of the joint, the muscular effort causing stretching or
                        laceration of the fascia that holds the nerve in its groove; it is
                        predisposed to if the groove is shallow as a result of imperfect
                        development of the medial condyle of the humerus, and by cubitus valgus.

                        The nerve slips forward, and may be felt lying on the medial aspect of
                        the condyle. It may retain this position, or it may slip backwards and
                        forwards with the movements of the arm. The symptoms at the time of the
                        displacement are some disability at the elbow, and pain and tingling
                        along the nerve, which are exaggerated by movement and by pressure. The
                        symptoms may subside altogether, or a neuritis may develop, with severe
                        pain shooting up the nerve.

                        The dislocated nerve is easily replaced, but is difficult to retain in
                        position. In recent cases the arm may be placed in the extended position
                        with a pad over the condyle, care being taken to avoid pressure on the
                        nerve. Failing relief, it is better to make a bed for the nerve by
                        dividing the deep fascia behind the medial condyle and to stitch the
                        edges of the fascia over the nerve. This operation has been successful
                        in all the recorded cases.

                        #The Sciatic Nerve.#--When this nerve is compressed, as by sitting on a
                        fence, there is tingling and powerlessness in the limb as a whole, known
                        as "sleeping" of the limb, but these phenomena are evanescent. _Injuries
                        to the great sciatic nerve_ are rare except in war. Partial division is
                        more common than complete, and it is noteworthy that the fibres destined
                        for the peroneal nerve are more often and more severely injured than
                        those for the tibial (internal popliteal). After complete division, all
                        the muscles of the leg are paralysed; if the section is in the upper
                        part of the thigh, the hamstrings are also paralysed. The limb is at
                        first quite powerless, but the patient usually recovers sufficiently to
                        be able to walk with a little support, and although the hamstrings are
                        paralysed the knee can be flexed by the sartorius and gracilis. The
                        chief feature is drop-foot. There is also loss of sensation below the
                        knee except along the course of the long saphenous nerve on the medial
                        side of the leg and foot. Sensibility to deep touch is only lost over a
                        comparatively small area on the dorsum of the foot.

                        #The Common Peroneal (external popliteal) nerve# is exposed to injury
                        where it winds round the neck of the fibula, because it is superficial
                        and lies against the unyielding bone. It may be compressed by a
                        tourniquet, or it may be bruised or torn in fractures of the upper end
                        of the bone. It has been divided in accidental wounds,--by a scythe, for
                        example,--in incising for cellulitis, and in performing subcutaneous
                        tenotomy of the biceps tendon. Cases have been observed of paralysis of
                        the nerve as a result of prolonged acute flexion of the knee in certain
                        occupations.

                        When the nerve is divided, the most obvious result is "drop-foot"; the
                        patient is unable to dorsiflex the foot and cannot lift his toes off the
                        ground, so that in walking he is obliged to jerk the foot forwards and
                        laterally. The loss of sensibility depends upon whether the nerve is
                        divided above or below the origin of the large cutaneous branch which
                        comes off just before it passes round the neck of the fibula. In course
                        of time the foot becomes inverted and the toes are pointed--pes
                        equino-varus--and trophic sores are liable to form.

                        #The Tibial (internal popliteal) nerve# is rarely injured.

                        #The Cranial nerves# are considered with affections of the head and neck
                        (Vol. II.).


                        NEURALGIA

                        The term neuralgia is applied clinically to any pain which follows the
                        course of a nerve, and is not referable to any discoverable cause. It
                        should not be applied to pain which results from pressure on a nerve by
                        a tumour, a mass of callus, an aneurysm, or by any similar gross lesion.
                        We shall only consider here those forms of neuralgia which are amenable
                        to surgical treatment.

                        #Brachial Neuralgia.#--The pain is definitely located in the
                        distribution of one of the branches or nerve roots, is often
                        intermittent, and is usually associated with tingling and disturbance of
                        tactile sensation. The root of the neck should be examined to exclude
                        pressure as the cause of the pain by a cervical rib, a tumour, or an
                        aneurysm. When medical treatment fails, the nerve-trunks may be injected
                        with saline solution or recourse may be had to operative measures, the
                        affected cords being exposed and stretched through an incision in the
                        posterior triangle of the neck. If this fails to give relief, the more
                        serious operation of resecting the posterior roots of the affected
                        nerves within the vertebral canal may be considered.

                        _Neuralgia of the sciatic nerve_--#sciatica#--is the most common form of
                        neuralgia met with in surgical practice.

                        It is chiefly met with in adults of gouty or rheumatic tendencies who
                        suffer from indigestion, constipation, and oxaluria--in fact, the same
                        type of patients who are liable to lumbago, and the two affections are
                        frequently associated. In hospital practice it is commonly met with in
                        coal-miners and others who assume a squatting position at work. The
                        onset of the pain may follow over-exertion and exposure to cold and wet,
                        especially in those who do not take regular exercise. Any error of diet
                        or indulgence in beer or wine may contribute to its development.

                        The essential symptom is paroxysmal or continuous pain along the course
                        of the nerve in the buttock, thigh, or leg. It may be comparatively
                        slight, or it may be so severe as to prevent sleep. It is aggravated by
                        movement, so that the patient walks lame or is obliged to lie up. It is
                        aggravated also by any movement which tends to put the nerve on the
                        stretch, as in bending down to put on the shoes, such movements also
                        causing tingling down the nerve, and sometimes numbness in the foot.
                        This may be demonstrated by flexing the thigh on the abdomen, the knee
                        being kept extended; there is no pain if the same manoeuvre is repeated
                        with the knee flexed. The nerve is sensitive to pressure, the most
                        tender points being its emergence from the greater sciatic foramen, the
                        hollow between the trochanter and the ischial tuberosity, and where the
                        common peroneal nerve winds round the neck of the fibula. The muscles of
                        the thigh are often wasted and are liable to twitch.

                        The clinical features vary a good deal in different cases; the affection
                        is often obstinate, and may last for many weeks or even months.

                        In the sciatica that results from neuritis and perineuritis, there is
                        marked tenderness on pressure due to the involvement of the nerve
                        filaments in the sheath of the nerve, and there may be patches of
                        cutaneous anaesthesia, loss of tendon reflexes, localised wasting of
                        muscles, and vaso-motor and trophic changes. The presence of the
                        reaction of degeneration confirms the diagnosis of neuritis. In
                        long-standing cases the pain and discomfort may lead to a postural
                        scoliosis (_ischias-scoliotica_).

                        _Diagnosis._--Pain referred along the course of the sciatic nerve on one
                        side, or, as is sometimes the case, on both sides, is a symptom of
                        tumours of the uterus, the rectum, or the pelvic bones. It may result
                        also from the pressure of an abscess or an aneurysm either inside the
                        pelvis or in the buttock, and is sometimes associated with disease of
                        the spinal medulla, such as tabes. Gluteal fibrositis may be mistaken
                        for sciatica. It is also necessary to exclude such conditions as disease
                        in the hip or sacro-iliac joint, especially tuberculous disease and
                        arthritis deformans, before arriving at a diagnosis of sciatica. A
                        digital examination of the rectum or vagina is of great value in
                        excluding intra-pelvic tumours.

                        _Treatment_ is both general and local. Any constitutional tendency, such
                        as gout or rheumatism, must be counteracted, and indigestion, oxaluria,
                        and constipation should receive appropriate treatment. In acute cases
                        the patient is confined to bed between blankets, the limb is wrapped in
                        thermogene wool, and the knee is flexed over a pillow; in some cases
                        relief is experienced from the use of a long splint, or slinging the leg
                        in a Salter's cradle. A rubber hot-bottle may be applied over the seat
                        of greatest pain. The bowels should be well opened by castor oil or by
                        calomel followed by a saline. Salicylate of soda in full doses, or
                        aspirin, usually proves effectual in relieving pain, but when this is
                        very intense it may call for injections of heroin or morphin. Potassium
                        iodide is of benefit in chronic cases.

                        Relief usually results from bathing, douching, and massage, and from
                        repeated gentle stretching of the nerve. This may be carried out by
                        passive movements of the limb--the hip being flexed while the knee is
                        kept extended; and by active movements--the patient flexing the limb at
                        the hip, the knee being maintained in the extended position. These
                        exercises, which may be preceded by massage, are carried out night and
                        morning, and should be practised systematically by those who are liable
                        to sciatica.

                        Benefit has followed the injection into the nerve itself, or into the
                        tissues surrounding it, of normal saline solution; from 70-100 c.c. are
                        injected at one time. If the pain recurs, the injection may require to
                        be repeated on many occasions at different points up and down the nerve.
                        Needling or acupuncture consists in piercing the nerve at intervals in
                        the buttock and thigh with long steel needles. Six or eight needles are
                        inserted and left in position for from fifteen to thirty minutes.

                        In obstinate and severe cases the nerve may be _forcibly stretched_.
                        This may be done bloodlessly by placing the patient on his back with the
                        hip flexed to a right angle, and then gradually extending the knee until
                        it is in a straight line with the thigh (Billroth). A general anaesthetic
                        is usually required. A more effectual method is to expose the nerve
                        through an incision at the fold of the buttock, and forcibly pull upon
                        it. This operation is most successful when the pain is due to the nerve
                        being involved in adhesions.

                        #Trigeminal Neuralgia.#--A severe form of epileptiform neuralgia occurs
                        in the branches of the fifth nerve, and is one of the most painful
                        affections to which human flesh is liable. So far as its pathology is
                        known, it is believed to be due to degenerative changes in the semilunar
                        (Gasserian) ganglion. It is met with in adults, is almost invariably
                        unilateral, and develops without apparent cause. The pain, which occurs
                        in paroxysms, is at first of moderate severity, but gradually becomes
                        agonising. In the early stages the paroxysms occur at wide intervals,
                        but later they recur with such frequency as to be almost continuous.
                        They are usually excited by some trivial cause, such as moving the jaws
                        in eating or speaking, touching the face as in washing, or exposure to a
                        draught of cold air. Between the paroxysms the patient is free from
                        pain, but is in constant terror of its return, and the face wears an
                        expression of extreme suffering and anxiety. When the paroxysm is
                        accompanied by twitching of the facial muscles, it is called _spasmodic
                        tic_.

                        The skin of the affected area may be glazed and red, or may be pale and
                        moist with inspissated sweat, the patient not daring to touch or wash
                        it.

                        There is excessive tenderness at the points of emergence of the
                        different branches on the face, and pressure over one or other of these
                        points may excite a paroxysm. In typical cases the patient is unable to
                        take any active part in life. The attempt to eat is attended with such
                        severe pain that he avoids taking food. In some cases the suffering is
                        so great that the patient only obtains sleep by the use of hypnotics,
                        and he is often on the verge of suicide.

                        _Diagnosis._--There is seldom any difficulty in recognising the disease.
                        It is important, however, to exclude the hysterical form of neuralgia,
                        which is characterised by its occurrence earlier in life, by the pain
                        varying in situation, being frequently bilateral, and being more often
                        constant than paroxysmal.

                        _Treatment._--Before having recourse to the measures described below, it
                        is advisable to give a thorough trial to the medical measures used in
                        the treatment of neuralgia.

                        _The Injection of Alcohol into the Nerve._--The alcohol acts by
                        destroying the nerve fibres, and must be brought into direct contact
                        with them; if the nerve has been properly struck the injection is
                        followed by complete anaesthesia in the distribution of the nerve. The
                        relief may last for from six months to three years; if the pain returns,
                        the injection may be repeated. The strength of the alcohol should be 85
                        per cent., and the amount injected about 2 c.c.; a general, or
                        preferably a local, anaesthetic (novocain) should be employed
                        (Schlosser); the needle is 8 cm. long, and 0.7 mm. in diameter. The
                        severe pain which the alcohol causes may be lessened, after the needle
                        has penetrated to the necessary depth, by passing a few cubic
                        centimetres of a 2 per cent. solution of _novocain-suprarenin_ through
                        it before the alcohol is injected. The treatment by injection of alcohol
                        is superior to the resection of branches of the nerve, for though
                        relapses occur after the treatment with alcohol, renewed freedom from
                        pain may be obtained by its repetition. The ophthalmic division should
                        not, however, be treated in this manner, for the alcohol may escape into
                        the orbit and endanger other nerves in this region. Harris recommends
                        the injection of alcohol into the semilunar ganglion.

                        _Operative Treatment._--This consists in the removal of the affected
                        nerve or nerves, either by resection--_neurectomy_; or by a combination
                        of resection with twisting or tearing of the nerve from its central
                        connections--_avulsion_. To prevent the regeneration of the nerve after
                        these operations, the canal of exit through the bone should be
                        obliterated; this is best accomplished by a silver screw-nail driven
                        home by an ordinary screw-driver (Charles H. Mayo).

                        When the neuralgia involves branches of two or of all three trunks, or
                        when it has recurred after temporary relief following resection of
                        individual branches, the _removal of the semilunar ganglion_, along with
                        the main trunks of the maxillary and mandibular divisions, should be
                        considered.

                        The operation is a difficult and serious one, but the results are
                        satisfactory so far as the cure of the neuralgia is concerned. There is
                        little or no disability from the unilateral paralysis of the muscles of
                        mastication; but on account of the insensitiveness of the cornea, the
                        eye must be protected from irritation, especially during the first month
                        or two after the operation; this may be done by fixing a large
                        watch-glass around the edge of the orbit with adhesive plaster.

                        If the ophthalmic branch is not involved, neither it nor the ganglion
                        should be interfered with; the maxillary and mandibular divisions should
                        be divided within the skull, and the foramen rotundum and foramen ovale
                        obliterated.




                        CHAPTER XVII

                        THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE


                        Structure of skin--_Blisters_--_Callosities_--_Corns_--_Chilblains_
                            --_Boils_--_Carbuncle_--_Abscess_--_Veldt sores_--Tuberculosis of
                            skin: _Inoculation tubercle_--_Lupus_: _Varieties_--Sporotrichosis
                            --Elephantiasis--Sebaceous cysts or wens--Moles--Horns--New growths:
                            _Fibroma_; _Papilloma_; _Adenoma_; _Epithelioma_; _Rodent cancer_;
                            _Melanotic cancer_; _Sarcoma_--AFFECTIONS OF CICATRICES--_Varieties
                            of scars_--_Keloid_--_Tumours_--AFFECTIONS OF NAILS.

                        #Structure of Skin.#--The skin is composed of a superficial cellular
                        layer--the epidermis, and the corium or true skin. The _epidermis_ is
                        differentiated from without inwards into the stratum corneum, the
                        stratum lucidum, the stratum granulosum, and the rete Malpighii or
                        germinal layer, from which all the others are developed. The _corium_ or
                        _true skin_ consists of connective tissue, in which ramify the blood
                        vessels, lymphatics, and nerves. That part of the corium immediately
                        adjoining the epidermis is known as the papillary portion, and contains
                        the terminal loops of the cutaneous blood vessels and the terminations
                        of the cutaneous nerves. The deeper portion of the true skin is known as
                        the reticular portion, and is largely composed of adipose tissue.

                        #Blisters# result from the exudation of serous fluid beneath the horny
                        layer of the epidermis. The fluid may be clear, as in the blisters of a
                        recent burn, or blood-stained, as in the blisters commonly accompanying
                        fractures of the leg. It may become purulent as a result of infection,
                        and this may be the starting-point of lymphangitis or cellulitis.

                        The skin should be disinfected and the blisters punctured. When
                        infected, the separated horny layer must be cut away with scissors to
                        allow of the necessary purification.

                        #Callosities# are prominent, indurated masses of the horny layer of the
                        epidermis, where it has been exposed to prolonged friction and pressure.
                        They occur on the fingers and hand as a result of certain occupations
                        and sports, but are most common under the balls of the toes or heel. A
                        bursa may form beneath a callosity, and if it becomes inflamed may cause
                        considerable suffering; if suppuration ensues, a sinus may form,
                        resembling a perforating ulcer of the foot.

                        The _treatment_ of callosities on the foot consists in removing pressure
                        by wearing properly fitting boots, and in applying a ring pad around the
                        callosity; another method is to fit a sock of spongiopilene with a hole
                        cut out opposite the callosity. After soaking in hot water, the
                        overgrown horny layer is pared away, and the part painted daily with a
                        saturated solution of salicylic acid in flexile collodion.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 93.--Callosities and Corns on the Sole and Plantar
                        Aspect of the Toes in a woman who was also the subject of flat-foot.]

                        #Corns.#--A corn is a localised overgrowth of the horny layer of the
                        epidermis, which grows downwards, pressing upon and displacing the
                        sensitive papillae of the corium. Corns are due to the friction and
                        pressure of ill-fitting boots, and are met with chiefly on the toes and
                        sole of the foot. A corn is usually hard, dry, and white; but it may be
                        sodden from moisture, as in "soft corns" between the toes. A bursa may
                        form beneath a corn, and if inflamed constitutes one form of bunion.
                        When suppuration takes place in relation to a corn, there is great pain
                        and disability, and it may prove the starting-point of lymphangitis.

                        The _treatment_ consists in the wearing of properly fitting boots and
                        stockings, and, if the symptoms persist, the corn should be removed.
                        This is done after the manner of chiropodists by digging out the corn
                        with a suitably shaped knife. A more radical procedure is to excise,
                        under local anaesthesia, the portion of skin containing the corn and
                        the underlying bursa. The majority of so-called corn solvents consist of
                        a solution of salicylic acid in collodion; if this is painted on daily,
                        the epidermis dies and can then be pared away. The unskilful paring of
                        corns may determine the occurrence of senile gangrene in those who are
                        predisposed to it by disease of the arteries.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 94.--Ulcerated Chilblains on Fingers of a Child.]

                        #Chilblains.#--Chilblain or _erythema pernio_ is a vascular disturbance
                        resulting from the alternate action of cold and heat on the distal parts
                        of the body. Chilblains are met with chiefly on the fingers and toes in
                        children and anaemic girls. In the mild form there is a sensation of
                        burning and itching, the part becomes swollen, of a dusky red colour,
                        and the skin is tense and shiny. In more severe cases the burning and
                        itching are attended with pain, and the skin becomes of a violet or
                        wine-red colour. There is a third degree, closely approaching
                        frost-bite, in which the skin tends to blister and give way, leaving an
                        indolent raw surface popularly known as a "broken chilblain."

                        Those liable to chilblains should take open-air exercise, nourishing
                        food, cod-liver oil, and tonics. Woollen stockings and gloves should be
                        worn in cold weather, and sudden changes of temperature avoided. The
                        symptoms may be relieved by ichthyol ointment, glycerin and belladonna,
                        or a mixture of Venice turpentine, castor oil, and collodion applied on
                        lint which is wrapped round the toe. Another favourite application is
                        one of equal parts of tincture of capsicum and compound liniment of
                        camphor, painted over the area night and morning. Balsam of Peru or
                        resin ointment spread on gauze should be applied to broken chilblains.
                        The most effective treatment is Bier's bandage applied for about six
                        hours twice daily; it can be worn while the patient is following his
                        occupation; in chronic cases this may be supplemented with hot-air
                        baths.

                        #Boils and Carbuncles.#--These result from infection with the
                        staphylococcus aureus, which enters the orifices of the ducts of the
                        skin under the influence of friction and pressure, as was demonstrated
                        by the well-known experiment of Garre, who produced a crop of pustules
                        and boils on his own forearm by rubbing in a culture of the
                        staphylococcus aureus.

                        A #boil# results when the infection is located in a hair follicle or
                        sebaceous gland. A hard, painful, conical swelling develops, to which,
                        so long as the skin retains its normal appearance, the term "blind
                        boil" is applied. Usually, however, the skin becomes red, and after a
                        time breaks, giving exit to a drop or two of thick pus. After an
                        interval of from six to ten days a soft white slough is discharged; this
                        is known as the "core," and consists of the necrosed hair follicle or
                        sebaceous gland. After the separation of the core the boil heals
                        rapidly, leaving a small depressed scar.

                        Boils are most frequently met with on the back of the neck and the
                        buttocks, and on other parts where the skin is coarse and thick and is
                        exposed to friction and pressure. The occurrence of a number or a
                        succession of boils is due to spread of the infection, the cocci from
                        the original boil obtaining access to adjacent hair follicles. The
                        spread of boils may be unwittingly promoted by the use of a domestic
                        poultice or the wearing of infected underclothing.

                        While boils are frequently met with in debilitated persons, and
                        particularly in those suffering from diabetes or Bright's disease, they
                        also occur in those who enjoy vigorous health. They seldom prove
                        dangerous to life except in diabetic subjects, but when they occur on
                        the face there is a risk of lymphatic and of general pyogenic infection.
                        Boils may be differentiated from syphilitic lesions of the skin by
                        their acute onset and progress, and by the absence of other evidence of
                        syphilis; and from the malignant or anthrax pustule by the absence of
                        the central black eschar and of the circumstances which attend upon
                        anthrax infection.

                        _Treatment._--The skin of the affected area should be painted with
                        iodine, and a Klapp's suction bell applied thrice daily. If pus forms,
                        the skin is frozen with ethyl-chloride and a small incision made, after
                        which the application of the suction bell is persevered with. The
                        further treatment consists in the use of diluted boracic or resin
                        ointment. In multiple boils on the trunk and limbs, lysol or boracic
                        baths are of service; the underclothing should be frequently changed,
                        and that which is discarded must be disinfected. In patients with
                        recurrence of boils about the neck, re-infection frequently takes place
                        from the scalp, to which therefore treatment should be directed.

                        Any impaired condition of health should be corrected; when, there is
                        sugar or albumen in the urine the conditions on which these depend must
                        receive appropriate treatment. When there are successive crops of boils,
                        recourse should be had to vaccines. In refractory cases benefit has
                        followed the subcutaneous injection of lipoid solution containing tin.

                        #Carbuncle# may be looked upon as an aggregation of boils, and is
                        characterised by a densely hard base and a brownish-red discoloration of
                        the skin. It is usually about the size of a crown-piece, but it may
                        continue to enlarge until it attains the size of a dinner-plate. The
                        patient is ill and feverish, and the pain may be so severe as to prevent
                        sleep. As time goes on several points of suppuration appear, and when
                        these burst there are formed a number of openings in the skin, giving it
                        a cribriform appearance; these openings exude pus. The different
                        openings ultimately fuse and the large adherent greyish-white slough is
                        exposed. The separation of the slough is a tedious process, and the
                        patient may become exhausted by pain, discharge, and toxin absorption.
                        When the slough is finally thrown off, a deep gap is left, which takes a
                        long time to heal. A large carbuncle is a grave disease, especially in a
                        weakly person suffering from diabetes or chronic alcoholism; we have on
                        several occasions seen diabetic coma supervene and the patient die
                        without recovering consciousness. In the majority of cases the patient
                        is laid aside for several months. It is most common in male adults over
                        forty years of age, and is usually situated on the back between the
                        shoulders. When it occurs on the face or anterior part of the neck it is
                        especially dangerous, because of the greater risk of dissemination of
                        the infection.

                        A carbuncle is to be differentiated from an ulcerated gumma and from
                        anthrax pustule.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 95.--Carbuncle of seventeen days' duration in a
                        woman aet. 57.]

                        _Treatment._--Pain is relieved by full doses of opium or codein, and
                        these drugs are specially indicated when sugar is present in the urine.
                        Vaccines may be given a trial. The diet should be liberal and easily
                        digested, and strychnin and other stimulants may be of service. Locally
                        the treatment is carried out on the same lines as for boils.

                        In some cases it is advisable to excise the carbuncle or to make
                        incisions across it in different directions, so that the resulting wound
                        presents a stellate appearance.

                        #Acute Abscesses of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue in Young
                        Children.#--In young infants, abscesses are not infrequently met with
                        scattered over the trunk and limbs, and are probably the result of
                        infection of the sebaceous glands from dirty underclothing. The
                        abscesses should be opened, and the further spread of infection
                        prevented by cleansing of the skin and by the use of clean under-linen.
                        Similar abscesses are met with on the scalp in association with eczema,
                        impetigo, and pediculosis.

                        #Veldt Sore.#--This sore usually originates in an abrasion of the
                        epidermis, such as a sun blister, the bite of an insect, or a scratch. A
                        pustule forms and bursts, and a brownish-yellow scab forms over it. When
                        this is removed, an ulcer is left which has little tendency to heal.
                        These sores are most common about the hands, arms, neck, and feet, and
                        are most apt to occur in those who have had no opportunities of washing,
                        and who have lived for a long time on tinned foods.

                        #Tuberculosis of the Skin.#--Interest attaches chiefly to the primary
                        forms of tuberculosis of the skin in which the bacilli penetrate from
                        without--inoculation tubercle and lupus.

                        #Inoculation Tubercle.#--The appearances vary with the conditions under
                        which the inoculation takes place. As observed on the fingers of adults,
                        the affection takes the form of an indolent painless swelling, the
                        epidermis being red and glazed, or warty, and irregularly fissured.
                        Sometimes the epidermis gives way, forming an ulcer with flabby
                        granulations. The infection rarely spreads to the lymphatics, but we
                        have seen inoculation tubercle of the index-finger followed by a large
                        cold abscess on the median side of the upper arm and by a huge mass of
                        breaking down glands in the axilla.

                        In children who run about barefooted in towns, tubercle may be
                        inoculated into wounds in the sole or about the toes, and although the
                        local appearances may not be characteristic, the nature of the infection
                        is revealed by its tendency to spread up the limb along the lymph
                        vessels, giving rise to abscesses and fungating ulcers in relation to
                        the femoral glands.

                        #Tuberculous Lupus.#--This is an extremely chronic affection of the
                        skin. It rarely extends to the lymph glands, and of all tuberculous
                        lesions is the least dangerous to life. The commonest form of
                        lupus--_lupus vulgaris_--usually commences in childhood or youth, and is
                        most often met with on the nose or cheek. The early and typical
                        appearance is that of brownish-yellow or pink nodules in the skin, about
                        the size of hemp seed. Healing frequently occurs in the centre of the
                        affected area while the disease continues to extend at the margin.

                        When there is actual destruction of tissue and ulceration--the so-called
                        "_lupus excedens_" or "_ulcerans_"--healing is attended with
                        cicatricial contraction, which may cause unsightly deformity. When the
                        cheek is affected, the lower eyelid may be drawn down and everted; when
                        the lips are affected, the mouth may be distorted or seriously
                        diminished in size. When the nose is attacked, both the skin and mucous
                        surfaces are usually involved, and the nasal orifices may be narrowed or
                        even obliterated; sometimes the soft parts, including the cartilages,
                        are destroyed, leaving only the bones covered by tightly stretched scar
                        tissue.

                        The disease progresses slowly, healing in some places and spreading at
                        others. The patient complains of a burning sensation, but little of
                        pain, and is chiefly concerned about the disfigurement. Nothing is more
                        characteristic of lupus than the appearance of fresh nodules in parts
                        which have already healed. In the course of years large tracts of the
                        face and neck may become affected. From the lips it may spread to the
                        gum and palate, giving to the mucous membrane the appearance of a
                        raised, bright-red, papillary or villous surface. When the disease
                        affects the gums, the teeth may become loose and fall out.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 96.--Tuberculous Elephantiasis in a woman aet. 35.]

                        On parts of the body other than the face, the disease is even more
                        chronic, and is often attended with a considerable production of dense
                        fibrous tissue--the so-called _fibroid lupus_. Sometimes there is a
                        warty thickening of the epidermis--_lupus verrucosus_. In the fingers
                        and toes it may lead to a progressive destruction of tissue like that
                        observed in leprosy, and from the resulting loss of portions of the
                        digits it has been called _lupus mutilans_. In the lower extremity a
                        remarkable form of the disease is sometimes met with, to which the term
                        _lupus elephantiasis_ (Fig. 96) has been applied. It commences as an
                        ordinary lupus of the toes or dorsum of the foot, from which the
                        tuberculous infection spreads to the lymph vessels, and the limb as a
                        whole becomes enormously swollen and unshapely.

                        Finally, a long-standing lupus, especially on the cheek, may become the
                        seat of epithelioma--_lupus epithelioma_--usually of the exuberant or
                        cauliflower type, which, like other epitheliomas that originate in scar
                        tissue, presents little tendency to infect the lymphatics.

                        The _diagnosis_ of lupus is founded on the chronic progress and long
                        duration, and the central scarring with peripheral extension of the
                        disease. On the face it is most liable to be confused with syphilis and
                        with rodent cancer. The syphilitic lesion belongs to the tertiary
                        period, and although presenting a superficial resemblance to
                        tuberculosis, its progress is more rapid, so that within a few months it
                        may involve an area of skin as wide as would be affected by lupus in as
                        many years. Further, it readily yields to anti-syphilitic treatment. In
                        cases of tertiary syphilis in which the nose is destroyed, it will be
                        noticed that the bones have suffered most, while in lupus the
                        destruction of tissue involves chiefly the soft parts.

                        Rodent cancer is liable to be mistaken for lupus, because it affects the
                        same parts of the face; it is equally chronic, and may partly heal. It
                        begins later in life, however, the margin of the ulcer is more sharply
                        defined, and often presents a "rolled" appearance.

                        _Treatment._--When the disease is confined to a limited area, the most
                        rapid and certain cure is obtained by _excision_; larger areas are
                        scraped with the sharp spoon. The _ray treatment_ includes the use of
                        luminous, Rontgen, or radium rays, and possesses the advantage of being
                        comparatively painless and of being followed by the least amount of
                        scarring and deformity.

                        Encouraging results have also been obtained by the application of carbon
                        dioxide snow.

                        #Multiple subcutaneous tuberculous nodules# are met with chiefly in
                        children. They are indolent and painless, and rarely attract attention
                        until they break down and form abscesses, which are usually about the
                        size of a cherry, and when these burst sinuses or ulcers result. If the
                        overlying skin is still intact, the best treatment is excision. If the
                        abscess has already infected the skin, each focus should be scraped and
                        packed.

                        #Sporotrichosis# is a mycotic infection due to the sporothrix Shenkii.
                        It presents so many features resembling syphilis and tubercle that it is
                        frequently mistaken for one or other of these affections. It occurs
                        chiefly in males between fifteen and forty-five, who are farmers, fruit
                        and vegetable dealers, or florists. There is usually a history of trauma
                        of the nature of a scratch or a cut, and after a long incubation period
                        there develop a series of small, hard, round nodules in the skin and
                        subcutaneous tissue which, without pain or temperature, soften into
                        cold abscesses and leave indolent ulcers or sinuses. The infection is
                        of slow progress and follows the course of the lymphatics. From the
                        gelatinous pus the organism is cultivated without difficulty, and this
                        is the essential step in arriving at a diagnosis. The disease yields in
                        a few weeks to full doses of iodide of potassium.

                        #Elephantiasis.#--This term is applied to an excessive enlargement of a
                        part depending upon an overgrowth of the skin and subcutaneous cellular
                        tissue, and it may result from a number of causes, acting independently
                        or in combination. The condition is observed chiefly in the extremities
                        and in the external organs of generation.

                        _Elephantiasis from Lymphatic or Venous Obstruction._--Of this the
                        best-known example is _tropical elephantiasis_ (E. arabum), which is
                        endemic in Samoa, Barbadoes, and other places. It attacks the lower
                        extremity or the genitals in either sex (Figs. 97, 98). The disease is
                        usually ushered in with fever, and signs of lymphangitis in the part
                        affected. After a number of such attacks, the lymph vessels appear to
                        become obliterated, and the skin and subcutaneous cellular tissue, being
                        bathed in stagnant lymph--which possibly contains the products of
                        streptococci--take on an overgrowth, which continues until the part
                        assumes gigantic proportions. In certain cases the lymph trunks have
                        been found to be blocked with the parent worms of the filaria Bancrofti.
                        Cases of elephantiasis of the lower extremity are met with in this
                        country in which there are no filarial parasites in the lymph vessels,
                        and these present features closely resembling the tropical variety, and
                        usually follow upon repeated attacks of lymphangitis or erysipelas.

                        The part affected is enormously increased in size, and causes
                        inconvenience from its bulk and weight. In contrast to ordinary dropsy,
                        there is no pitting on pressure, and the swelling does not disappear on
                        elevation of the limb. The skin becomes rough and warty, and may hang
                        down in pendulous folds. Blisters form on the surface and yield an
                        abundant exudate of clear lymph. From neglect of cleanliness, the skin
                        becomes the seat of eczema or even of ulceration attended with foul
                        discharge.

                        Samson Handley has sought to replace the blocked lymph vessels by
                        burying in the subcutaneous tissue of the swollen part a number of stout
                        silk threads--_lymphangioplasty_. By their capillary action they drain
                        the lymph to a healthy region above, and thus enable it to enter the
                        circulation. It has been more successful in the face and upper limb than
                        in the lower extremity. If the tissues are infected with pus organisms,
                        a course of vaccines should precede the operation.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 97.--Elephantiasis in a woman aet. 45.]

                        A similar type of elephantiasis may occur after extirpation of the lymph
                        glands in the axilla or groin; in the leg in long-standing standing
                        varix and phlebitis with chronic ulcer; in the arm as a result of
                        extensive cancerous disease of the lymphatics in the axilla secondarily
                        to cancer of the breast; and in extensive tuberculous disease of the
                        lymphatics. The last-named is chiefly observed in the lower limb in
                        young adult women, and from its following upon lupus of the toes or foot
                        it has been called _lupus elephantiasis_. The tuberculous infection
                        spreads slowly up the limb by way of the lymph vessels, and as these are
                        obliterated the skin and cellular tissues become hypertrophied, and the
                        surface is studded over with fungating tuberculous masses of a livid
                        blue colour. As the more severe forms of the disease may prove dangerous
                        to life by pyogenic complications inducing gangrene of the limb, the
                        question of amputation may have to be considered.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 98.--Elephantiasis of Penis and Scrotum in native of
                        Demerara.

                        (Mr. Annandale's case.)]

                        Belonging to this group also is a form of _congenital elephantiasis_
                        resulting from the circular constriction of a limb _in utero_ by
                        amniotic bands.

                        _Elephantiasis occurring apart from lymphatic or venous obstruction_ is
                        illustrated by _elephantiasis nervorum_, in which there is an overgrowth
                        of the skin and cellular tissue of an extremity in association with
                        neuro-fibromatosis of the cutaneous nerves (Fig. 89); and by
                        _elephantiasis Graecorum_--a form of leprosy in which the skin of the
                        face becomes the seat of tumour-like masses consisting of leprous
                        nodules. It is also illustrated by _elephantiasis involving the scrotum_
                        as a result of prolonged irritation by the urine in cases in which the
                        penis has been amputated and the urine has infiltrated the scrotal
                        tissues over a period of years.

                        #Sebaceous Cysts.#--Atheromatous cysts or wens are formed in relation to
                        the sebaceous glands and hair follicles. They are commonly met with in
                        adults, on the scalp (Fig. 99), face, neck, back, and external genitals.
                        Sometimes they are multiple, and they may be met with in several members
                        of the same family. They are smooth, rounded, or discoid cysts, varying
                        in size from a split-pea to a Tangerine orange. In consistence they are
                        firm and elastic, or fluctuating, and are incorporated with the
                        overlying skin, but movable on the deeper structures. The orifice of the
                        partly blocked sebaceous follicle is sometimes visible, and the contents
                        of the cyst can be squeezed through the opening. The wall of the cyst is
                        composed of a connective-tissue capsule lined by stratified squamous
                        epithelium. The contents consist of accumulated epithelial cells, and
                        are at first dry and pearly white in appearance, but as a result of
                        fatty degeneration they break down into a greyish-yellow pultaceous and
                        semi-fluid material having a peculiar stale odour. It is probable that
                        the decomposition of the contents is the result of the presence of
                        bacteria, and that from the surgical point of view they should be
                        regarded as infective. A sebaceous cyst may remain indefinitely without
                        change, or may slowly increase in size, the skin over it becoming
                        stretched and closely adherent to the cyst wall as a result of friction
                        and pressure. The contents may ooze from the orifice of the duct and dry
                        on the skin surface, leading to the formation of a sebaceous horn
                        (Fig. 100). As a result of injury the cyst may undergo sudden
                        enlargement from haemorrhage into its interior.

                        Recurrent attacks of inflammation frequently occur, especially in wens
                        of the face and scalp. Suppuration may ensue and be followed by cure of
                        the cyst, or an offensive fungating ulcer forms which may be mistaken
                        for epithelioma. True cancerous transformation is rare.

                        Wens are to be _diagnosed_ from dermoids, from fatty tumours, and from
                        cold abscesses. Dermoids usually appear before adult life, and as they
                        nearly always lie beneath the fascia, the skin is movable over them. A
                        fatty tumour is movable, and is often lobulated. The confusion with a
                        cold abscess is most likely to occur in wens of the neck or back, and it
                        may be impossible without the use of an exploring needle to
                        differentiate between them.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 99.--Multiple Sebaceous Cysts or Wens; the larger
                        ones are of many years' duration.]

                        _Treatment._--The removal of wens is to be recommended while they are
                        small and freely movable, as they are then easily shelled out after
                        incising the overlying skin; sometimes splitting the cyst makes its
                        removal easier. Local anaesthesia is to be preferred. It is important
                        that none of the cyst wall be left behind. In large and adherent wens an
                        ellipse of skin is removed along with the cyst. When inflamed, it may be
                        impossible to dissect out the cyst, and the wall should be destroyed
                        with carbolic acid, the resulting wound being treated by the open
                        method.

                        #Moles.#--The term mole is applied to a pigmented, and usually hairy,
                        patch of skin, present at or appearing shortly after birth. The colour
                        varies from brown to black, according to the amount of melanin pigment
                        present. The lesion consists in an overgrowth of epidermis which often
                        presents an alveolar arrangement. Moles vary greatly in size: some are
                        mere dots, others are as large as the palm of the hand, and occasionally
                        a mole covers half the face. In addition to being unsightly, they bleed
                        freely when abraded, are liable to ulcerate from friction and pressure,
                        and occasionally become the starting-point of melanotic cancer. Rodent
                        cancer sometimes originates in the slightly pigmented moles met with on
                        the face. Overgrowths in relation to the cutaneous nerves, especially
                        the plexiform neuroma, occasionally originate in pigmented moles. Soldau
                        believes that the pigmentation and overgrowth of the epidermis in moles
                        are associated with, and probably result from, a fibromatosis of the
                        cutaneous nerves.

                        _Treatment._--The quickest way to get rid of a mole is to excise it; if
                        the edges of the gap cannot be brought together with sutures, recourse
                        should be had to grafting. In large hairy moles of the face whose size
                        forbids excision, radium or the X-rays should be employed. Excellent
                        results have been obtained by refrigeration with solid carbon dioxide.
                        In children and women with delicate skin, applications of from ten to
                        thirty seconds suffice. In persons with coarse skin an application of
                        one minute may be necessary, and it may have to be repeated.

                        #Horns.#--The _sebaceous_ horn results from the accumulation of the
                        dried contents of a wen on the surface of the skin: the sebaceous
                        material after drying up becomes cornified, and as fresh material is
                        added to the base the horn increases in length (Fig. 100). The _wart_
                        horn grows from a warty papilloma of the skin. _Cicatrix_ horns are
                        formed by the heaping up of epidermis in the scars that result from
                        burns. _Nail_ horns are overgrown nails (keratomata of the nail bed),
                        and are met with chiefly in the great toe of elderly bedridden patients.
                        If an ulcer forms at the base of a horn, it may prove the starting-point
                        of epithelioma, and for this reason, as well as for others, horns should
                        be removed.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 100.--Sebaceous Horn growing from Auricle.

                        (Dr. Kenneth Maclachan's case.)]

                        #New Growths in the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue.#--The _Angioma_ has
                        been described with diseases of blood vessels. _Fibroma._--Various types
                        of fibroma occur in the skin. A soft pedunculated fibroma, about the
                        size of a pea, is commonly met with, especially on the neck and trunk;
                        it is usually solitary, and is easily removed with scissors. The
                        multiple, soft fibroma known as _molluscum fibrosum_, which depends upon
                        a neuro-fibromatosis of the cutaneous nerves, is described with the
                        tumours of nerves. Hard fibromas occurring singly or in groups may be
                        met with, especially in the skin of the buttock, and may present a local
                        malignancy, recurring after removal like the "recurrent fibroid" of
                        Paget. The "painful subcutaneous nodule" is a solitary fibroma related
                        to one of the cutaneous nerves. The hard fibroma known as _keloid_ is
                        described with the affections of scars.

                        #Papilloma.#--The _common wart_ or verruca is an outgrowth of the
                        surface epidermis. It may be sessile or pedunculated hard or soft. The
                        surface may be smooth, or fissured and foliated like a cauliflower, or
                        it may be divided up into a number of spines. Warts are met with chiefly
                        on the hands, and are often multiple, occurring in clusters or in
                        successive crops. Multiple warts appear to result from some contagion,
                        the nature of which is unknown; they sometimes occur in an epidemic form
                        among school-children, and show a remarkable tendency to disappear
                        spontaneously. The solitary flat-topped wart which occurs on the face
                        of old people may, if irritated, become the seat of epithelioma. A warty
                        growth of the epidermis is a frequent accompaniment of moles and of that
                        variety of lupus known as _lupus verrucosus_.

                        _Treatment._--In the multiple warts of children the health should be
                        braced up by a change to the seaside. A dusting-powder, consisting of
                        boracic acid with 5 per cent. salicylic acid, may be rubbed into the
                        hands after washing and drying. The persistent warts of young adults
                        should be excised after freezing with chloride of ethyl. When cutting is
                        objected to, they may be painted night and morning with salicylic
                        collodion, the epidermis being dehydrated with alcohol before each
                        application.

                        _Venereal warts_ occur on the genitals of either sex, and may form large
                        cauliflower-like masses on the inner surface of the prepuce or of the
                        labia majora. Although frequently co-existing with gonorrhoea or
                        syphilis, they occur independently of these diseases, being probably
                        acquired by contact with another individual suffering from warts
                        (C. W. Cathcart). They give rise to considerable irritation and
                        suffering, and when cleanliness is neglected there may be an offensive
                        discharge.

                        In the female, the cauliflower-like masses are dissected from the labia;
                        in the male, the prepuce is removed and the warts on the glans are
                        snipped off with scissors. In milder cases, the warts usually disappear
                        if the parts are kept absolutely dry and clean. A useful dusting-powder
                        is one consisting of calamine and 5 per cent. salicylic acid; the
                        exsiccated sulphate of iron, in the form of a powder, may be employed in
                        cases which resist this treatment.

                        #Adenoma.#--This is a comparatively rare tumour growing from the glands
                        of the skin. One variety, known as the "tomato tumour," which apparently
                        originates from _the sweat glands_, is met with on the scalp and face in
                        women past middle life. These growths are often multiple; the individual
                        tumours vary in size, and the skin, which is almost devoid of hairs, is
                        glistening and tightly stretched over them. A similar tumour may occur
                        on the nose. The _sebaceous adenoma_, which originates from the
                        sebaceous glands, forms a projecting tumour on the face or scalp, and
                        when the skin is irritated it may ulcerate and fungate. The treatment
                        consists in the removal of the tumour along with the overlying skin.

                        The exuberant masses on the nose known as "rhinophyma," "lipoma nasi,"
                        or "potato nose" are of the nature of sebaceous adenoma, and are removed
                        by shaving them off with a knife until the normal shape of the nose is
                        restored Healing takes place with remarkable rapidity.

                        #Cancer.#--There are several types of primary cancer of the skin, the
                        most important being squamous epithelioma, rodent cancer, and melanotic
                        cancer.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 101.--Paraffin Epithelioma.]

                        #Epithelioma# occurs in a variety of forms. When originating in a small
                        ulcer or wart-for example on the face in old people--it presents the
                        features of a chronic indurated ulcer. A more exuberant and rapidly
                        growing form of epithelial cancer, described by Hutchinson as the
                        _crateriform ulcer_, commences on the face as a small red pimple which
                        rapidly develops into an elevated mass shaped like a bee-hive, and
                        breaks down in the centre. Epithelioma may develop anywhere on the body
                        in relation to long-standing ulcers, especially that resulting from a
                        burn or from lupus; this form usually presents an exuberant outgrowth of
                        epidermis not unlike a cauliflower. An interesting example of
                        epithelioma has been described by Neve of Kashmir. The natives in that
                        province are in the habit of carrying a fire-basket suspended from the
                        waist, which often burns the skin and causes a chronic ulcer, and many
                        of these ulcers become the seat of epithelioma, due, in Neve's opinion,
                        to the actual contact of the sooty pan with the skin.

                        The term _trade epithelioma_ has been applied to that form met with in
                        those who follow certain occupations, such as paraffin workers and
                        chimney-sweeps. The most recent member of this group is the _X-ray
                        carcinoma_, which is met with in those who are constantly exposed to the
                        irritation of the X-rays; there is first a chronic dermatitis with warty
                        overgrowth of the surface epithelium, pigmentation, and the formation of
                        fissures and warts. The trade epithelioma varies a good deal in
                        malignancy, but it tends to cause death in the same manner as other
                        epitheliomas.

                        Epithelial cancer has also been observed in those who have taken arsenic
                        over long periods for medicinal purposes.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 102.--Rodent Cancer of Inner Canthus.]

                        #Rodent Cancer# (Rodent Ulcer).--This is a cancer originating in the
                        sweat glands or sebaceous follicles, or in the foetal residues of
                        cutaneous glands. The cells are small and closely packed together in
                        alveoli or in reticulated columns; cell nests are rare. It is remarkably
                        constant in its seat of origin, being nearly always located on the
                        lateral aspect of the nose or in the vicinity of the lower eyelid
                        (Fig. 102). It is rare on the trunk or limbs. It commences as a small
                        flattened nodule in the skin, the epidermis over it being stretched and
                        shining. The centre becomes depressed, while the margins extend in the
                        form of an elevated ridge. Sooner or later the epidermis gives way in
                        the centre, exposing a smooth raw surface devoid of granulations.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 103.--Rodent Cancer of fifteen years' duration,
                        which has destroyed the contents of the Orbit.

                        (Sir Montagu Cotterill's case)]

                        The margin, while in parts irregular, is typically represented by a
                        well-defined "rolled" border which consists of the peripheral portion of
                        the cancer that has not broken down. The central ulcer may temporarily
                        heal. There is itching but little pain, and the condition progresses
                        extremely slowly; rodent cancers which have existed for many years are
                        frequently met with. The disease attacks and destroys every structure
                        with which it comes in contact, such as the eyelids, the walls of the
                        nasal cavities, and the bones of the face; hence it may produce the most
                        hideous deformities (Fig. 103). The patient may succumb to haemorrhage or
                        to infective complications such as erysipelas or meningitis.

                        Secondary growths in the lymph glands, while not unknown, are extremely
                        rare. We have only seen them once--in a case of rodent cancer in the
                        groin.

                        _Diagnosis._--Lupus is the disease most often mistaken for rodent
                        cancer. Lupus usually begins earlier in life, it presents apple-jelly
                        nodules, and lacks the rounded, elevated border. Syphilitic lesions
                        progress more rapidly, and also lack the characteristic margin. The
                        differentiation from squamous epithelioma is of considerable importance,
                        as the latter affection spreads more rapidly, involves the lymph glands
                        early, and is much more dangerous to life.

                        _Treatment._--In rodent cancers of limited size--say less than one inch
                        in diameter--free excision is the most rapid and certain method of
                        treatment. The alternative is the application of radium or of the
                        Rontgen rays, which, although requiring many exposures, results in cure
                        with the minimum of disfigurement. If the cancer already covers an
                        extensive area, or has invaded the cavity of the orbit or nose, radium
                        or X-rays yield the best results. The effect is soon shown by the
                        ingrowth of healthy epithelium from the surrounding skin, and at the
                        same time the discharge is lessened. Good results are also reported from
                        the application of carbon dioxide snow, especially when this follows
                        upon a course of X-ray treatment.

                        #Paget's disease# of the nipple is an epithelioma occurring in women
                        over forty years of age: a similar form of epithelioma is sometimes met
                        with at the umbilicus or on the genitals.

                        #Melanotic Cancer.#--Under this head are included all new growths which
                        contain an excess of melanin pigment. Many of these were formerly
                        described as melanotic sarcoma. They nearly always originate in a
                        pigmented mole which has been subjected to irritation. The primary
                        growth may remain so small that its presence is not even suspected, or
                        it may increase in size, ulcerate, and fungate. The amount of pigment
                        varies: when small in amount the growth is brown, when abundant it is a
                        deep black. The most remarkable feature is the rapidity with which the
                        disease becomes disseminated along the lymphatics, the first evidence of
                        which is an enlargement of the lymph glands. As the primary growth is
                        often situated on the sole of the foot or in the matrix of the nail of
                        the great toe, the femoral and inguinal glands become enlarged in
                        succession, forming tumours much larger than the primary growth.
                        Sometimes the dissemination involves the lymph vessels of the limb,
                        forming a series of indurated pigmented cords and nodules (Fig. 104).
                        Lastly, the dissemination may be universal throughout the body, and this
                        usually occurs at a comparatively early stage. The secondary growths are
                        deeply pigmented, being usually of a coal-black colour, and melanin
                        pigment may be present in the urine. When recurrence takes place in or
                        near the scar left by the operation, the cancer nodules are not
                        necessarily pigmented.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 104.--Diffuse Melanotic Cancer of Lymphatics of Skin
                        secondary to a Growth in the Sole of the Foot.]

                        To extirpate the disease it is necessary to excise the tumour, with a
                        zone of healthy skin around it and a somewhat large zone of the
                        underlying subcutaneous tissue and deep fascia. Hogarth Pringle
                        recommends that a broad strip of subcutaneous fascia up to and including
                        the nearest anatomical group of glands should be removed with the tumour
                        in one continuous piece.

                        #Secondary Cancer of the Skin.#--Cancer may spread to the skin from a
                        subjacent growth by direct continuity or by way of the lymphatics. Both
                        of these processes are so well illustrated in cases of mammary cancer
                        that they will be described in relation to that disease.

                        #Sarcoma# of various types is met with in the skin. The fibroma, after
                        excision, may recur as a fibro-sarcoma. The alveolar sarcoma commences
                        as a hard lump and increases in size until the epidermis gives way and
                        an ulcer is formed.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 105.--Melanotic Cancer of Forehead with Metastases
                        in Lymph Vessels and Glands.

                        (Mr. D. P. D. Wilkie's case.)]

                        A number of fresh tumours may spring up around the original growth.
                        Sometimes the primary growth appears in the form of multiple nodules
                        which tend to become confluent. Excision, unless performed early, is of
                        little avail, and in any case should be followed up by exposure to
                        radium.


                        AFFECTIONS OF CICATRICES

                        A cicatrix or scar consists of closely packed bundles of white fibres
                        covered by epidermis; the skin glands and hair follicles are usually
                        absent. The size, shape, and level of the cicatrix depend upon the
                        conditions which preceded healing.

                        A healthy scar, when recently formed, has a smooth, glossy surface of a
                        pinkish colour, which tends to become whiter as a result of obliteration
                        of the blood vessels concerned in its formation.

                        _Weak Scars._--A scar is said to be weak when it readily breaks down as
                        a result of irritation or pressure. The scars resulting from severe
                        burns and those over amputation stumps are especially liable to break
                        down from trivial causes. The treatment is to excise the weak portion of
                        the scar and bring the edges of the gap together.

                        _Contracted scars_ frequently cause deformity either by displacing
                        parts, such as the eyelid or lip, or by fixing parts and preventing the
                        normal movements--for example, a scar on the flexor aspect of a joint
                        may prevent extension of the forearm (Fig. 63). These are treated by
                        dividing the scar, correcting the deformity, and filling up the gap with
                        epithelial grafts, or with a flap of the whole thickness of the skin.
                        When deformity results from _depression of a scar_, as is not uncommon
                        after the healing of a sinus, the treatment is to excise the scar.
                        Depressed scars may be raised by the injection of paraffin into the
                        subcutaneous tissue.

                        _Painful Scars._--Pain in relation to a scar is usually due to nerve
                        fibres being compressed or stretched in the cicatricial tissue; and in
                        some cases to ascending neuritis. The treatment consists in excising the
                        scar or in stretching or excising a portion of the nerve affected.

                        _Pigmented or Discoloured Scars._--The best-known examples are the blue
                        coloration which results from coal-dust or gunpowder, the brown scars
                        resulting from chronic ulcer with venous congestion of the leg, and the
                        variously coloured scars caused by tattooing. The only satisfactory
                        method of getting rid of the coloration is to excise the scar; the edges
                        are brought together by sutures, or the raw surface is covered with
                        skin-grafts according to the size of the gap.

                        _Hypertrophied Scars._--Scars occasionally broaden out and become
                        prominent, and on exposed parts this may prove a source of
                        disappointment after operations such as those for goitre or tuberculous
                        glands in the neck. There is sometimes considerable improvement from
                        exposure to the X-rays.

                        _Keloid._--This term is applied to an overgrowth of scar tissue which
                        extends beyond the area of the original wound, and the name is derived
                        from the fact that this extension occurs in the form of radiating
                        processes, suggesting the claws of a crab. It is essentially a fibroma
                        or new growth of fibrous tissue, which commences in relation to the
                        walls of the smaller blood vessels; the bundles of fibrous tissue are
                        for the most part parallel with the surface, and the epidermis is
                        tightly stretched over them. It is more frequent in the negro and in
                        those who are, or have been, the subjects of tuberculous disease.

                        [Illustration: FIG. 106.--Recurrent Keloid in scar left by operation for
                        tuberculous glands in a girl aet. 7.]

                        Keloid may attack scars of any kind, such as those resulting from
                        leech-bites, acne pustules, boils or blisters; those resulting from
                        operation or accidental wounds; and the scars resulting from burns,
                        especially when situated over the sternum, appear to be specially
                        liable. The scar becomes more and more conspicuous, is elevated above
                        the surface, of a pinkish or brownish-pink pink colour, and sends out
                        irregular prolongations around its margins. The patient may complain of
                        itching and burning, and of great sensitiveness of the scar, even to
                        contact with the clothing.

                        There is a natural hesitation to excise keloid because of the fear of
                        its returning in the new scar. The application of radium is, so far as
                        we know, the only means of preventing such return. The irritation
                        associated with keloid may be relieved by the application of salicylic
                        collodion or of salicylic and creosote plaster.

                        _Epithelioma_ is liable to attack scars in old people, especially those
                        which result from burns sustained early in childhood and have never
                        really healed. From the absence of lymphatics in scar tissue, the
                        disease does not spread to the glands until it has invaded the tissues
                        outside the scar; the prognosis is therefore better than in epithelioma
                        in general. It should be excised widely; in the lower extremity when
                        there is also extensive destruction of tissue from an antecedent chronic
                        ulcer or osteomyelitis, it may be better to amputate the limb.


                        AFFECTION OF THE NAILS

                        _Injuries._--When a nail is contused or crushed, blood is extravasated
                        beneath it, and the nail is usually shed, a new one growing in its
                        place. A splinter driven underneath the nail causes great pain, and if
                        organisms are carried in along with it, may give rise to infective
                        complications. The free edge of the nail should be clipped away to allow
                        of the removal of the foreign body and the necessary disinfection.

                        _Trophic Changes._--The growth of the nails may be interfered with in
                        any disturbance of the general health. In nerve lesions, such as a
                        divided nerve-trunk, the nails are apt to suffer, becoming curved,
                        brittle, or furrowed, or they may be shed.

                        _Onychia_ is the term applied to an infection of the soft parts around
                        the nail or of the matrix beneath it. The commonest form of onychia has
                        already been referred to with whitlow. There is a superficial variety
                        resulting from the extension of a purulent blister beneath the nail
                        lifting it up from its bed, the pus being visible through the nail. The
                        nail as well as the raised horny layer of the epidermis should be
                        removed. A deeper and more troublesome onychia results from infection at
                        the nail-fold; the infection spreads slowly beneath the fold until it
                        reaches the matrix, and a drop or two of pus forms beneath the nail,
                        usually in the region of the lunule. This affection entails a
                        disability of the finger which may last for weeks unless it is properly
                        treated. Treatment by hyperaemia, using a suction bell, should first be
                        tried, and, failing improvement, the nail-fold and lunule should be
                        frozen, and a considerable portion removed with the knife; if only a
                        small portion of the nail is removed, the opening is blocked by
                        granulations springing from the matrix. A new nail is formed, but it is
                        liable to be misshapen.

                        _Tuberculous onychia_ is met with in children and adolescents. It
                        appears as a livid or red swelling at the root of the nail and spreading
                        around its margins. The epidermis, which is thin and shiny, gives way,
                        and the nail is usually shed.

                        _Syphilitic_ affections of the nails assume various aspects. A primary
                        chancre at the edge of the nail may be mistaken for a whitlow,
                        especially if it is attended with much pain. Other forms of onychia
                        occur during secondary syphilis simultaneously with the skin eruptions,
                        and may prove obstinate and lead to shedding of the nails. They also
                        occur in inherited syphilis. In addition to general treatment, an
                        ointment containing 5 per cent. of oleate of mercury should be applied
                        locally.

                        _Ingrowing Toe-nail._--This is more accurately described as an
                        overgrowth of the soft tissues along the edge of the nail. It is most
                        frequently met with in the great toe in young adults with flat-foot
                        whose feet perspire freely, who wear ill-fitting shoes, and who cut
                        their toe-nails carelessly or tear them with their fingers. Where the
                        soft tissues are pressed against the edge of the nail, the skin gives
                        way and there is the formation of exuberant granulations and of
                        discharge which is sometimes foetid. The affection is a painful one and
                        may unfit the patient for work. In mild cases the condition may be
                        remedied by getting rid of contributing causes and by disinfecting the
                        skin and nail; the nail is cut evenly, and the groove between it and the
                        skin packed with an antiseptic dusting-powder, such as boracic acid. In
                        more severe cases it may be necessary to remove an ellipse of tissue
                        consisting of the edge of the nail, together with the subjacent matrix
                        and the redundant nail-fold.

                        _Subungual exostosis_ is an osteoma growing from the terminal phalanx of
                        the great toe (Fig. 107). It raises the nail and may be accompanied by
                        ulceration of the skin over the most prominent part of the growth. The
                        soft parts, including the nail, should be reflected towards the dorsum
                        in the form of a flap, the base of the exostosis divided with the
                        chisel, and the exostosis removed.

                        _Malignant disease_ in relation to the nails is rare. Squamous
                        epithelioma and melanotic cancer are the forms met with. Treatment
                        consists in amputating the digit concerned, and in removing the
                        associated lymph glands.To Sherlock Holmes she is always the woman. I have seldom heard him mention her under any other name. In his eyes she eclipses and predominates the whole of her sex. It was not that he felt any emotion akin to love for Irene Adler. All emotions, and that one particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirably balanced mind. He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and observing machine that the world has seen, but as a lover he would have placed himself in a false position. He never spoke of the softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer. They were admirable things for the observer--excellent for drawing the veil from men's motives and actions. But for the trained reasoner to admit such intrusions into his own delicate and finely adjusted temperament was to introduce a distracting factor which might throw a doubt upon all his mental results. Grit in a sensitive instrument, or a crack in one of his own high-power lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strong emotion in a nature such as his. And yet there was but one woman to him, and that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious and questionable memory.

                                                I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us away from each other. My own complete happiness, and the home-centred interests which rise up around the man who first finds himself master of his own establishment, were sufficient to absorb all my attention, while Holmes, who loathed every form of society with his whole Bohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, buried among his old books, and alternating from week to week between cocaine and ambition, the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of his own keen nature. He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by the study of crime, and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary powers of observation in following out those clues, and clearing up those mysteries which had been abandoned as hopeless by the official police. From time to time I heard some vague account of his doings: of his summons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of his clearing up of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee, and finally of the mission which he had accomplished so delicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland. Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merely shared with all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of my former friend and companion.

                                                One night--it was on the twentieth of March, 1888--I was returning from a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to civil practice), when my way led me through Baker Street. As I passed the well-remembered door, which must always be associated in my mind with my wooing, and with the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I was seized with a keen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was employing his extraordinary powers. His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as I looked up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against the blind. He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him. To me, who knew his every mood and habit, his attitude and manner told their own story. He was at work again. He had risen out of his drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new problem. I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which had formerly been in part my own.

                                                His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I think, to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he waved me to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars, and indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he stood before the fire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion.

                                                "Wedlock suits you," he remarked. "I think, Watson, that you have put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you."

                                                "Seven!" I answered.

                                                "Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, I fancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe. You did not tell me that you intended to go into harness."

                                                "Then, how do you know?"

                                                "I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been getting yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and careless servant girl?"

                                                "My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much. You would certainly have been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as I have changed my clothes I can'splitSize imagine how you deduce it. As to Mary Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, but there, again, I fail to see how you work it out."

                                                He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands together.

                                                "It is simplicity itself," said he; "my eyes tell me that on the inside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, the leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they have been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, and that you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the London slavey. As to your practice, if a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right side of his top-hat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of the medical profession."

                                                I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his process of deduction. "When I hear you give your reasons," I remarked, "the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously simple that I could easily do it myself, though at each successive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you explain your process. And yet I believe that my eyes are as good as yours."

                                                "Quite so," he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himself down into an armchair. "You see, but you do not observe. The distinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen the steps which lead up from the hall to this room."

                                                "Frequently."

                                                "How often?"

                                                "Well, some hundreds of times."

                                                "Then how many are there?"

                                                "How many? I don'splitSize know."

                                                "Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is just my point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I have both seen and observed. By the way, since you are interested in these little problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one or two of my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this." He threw over a sheet of thick, pink-tinted notepaper which had been lying open upon the table. "It came by the last post," said he. "Read it aloud."

                                                The note was undated, and without either signature or address.

                                                "There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight o'clock," it said, "a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of the very deepest moment. Your recent services to one of the royal houses of Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted with matters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated. This account of you we have from all quarters received. Be in your chamber then at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your visitor wear a mask."

                                                "This is indeed a mystery," I remarked. "What do you imagine that it means?"

                                                "I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorise before one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts. But the note itself. What do you deduce from it?"

                                                I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it was written.

                                                "The man who wrote it was presumably well to do," I remarked, endeavouring to imitate my companion's processes. "Such paper could not be bought under half a crown a packet. It is peculiarly strong and stiff."

                                                "Peculiar--that is the very word," said Holmes. "It is not an English paper at all. Hold it up to the light."

                                                I did so, and saw a large "E" with a small "g," a "P," and a large "G" with a small "splitSize" woven into the texture of the paper.

                                                "What do you make of that?" asked Holmes.

                                                "The name of the maker, no doubt; or his monogram, rather."

                                                "Not at all. The 'G' with the small 'splitSize' stands for 'Gesellschaft,' which is the German for 'Company.' It is a customary contraction like our 'Co.' 'P,' of course, stands for 'Papier.' Now for the 'Eg.' Let us glance at our Continental Gazetteer." He took down a heavy brown volume from his shelves. "Eglow, Eglonitz--here we are, Egria. It is in a German-speaking country--in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad. 'Remarkable as being the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and for its numerous glass-factories and paper-mills.' Ha, ha, my boy, what do you make of that?" His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue triumphant cloud from his cigarette.

                                                "The paper was made in Bohemia," I said.

                                                "Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do you note the peculiar construction of the sentence--'This account of you we have from all quarters received.' A Frenchman or Russian could not have written that. It is the German who is so uncourteous to his verbs. It only remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by this German who writes upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask to showing his face. And here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to resolve all our doubts."

                                                As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses' hoofs and grating wheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at the bell. Holmes whistled.

                                                "A pair, by the sound," said he. "Yes," he continued, glancing out of the window. "A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties. A hundred and fifty guineas apiece. There's money in this case, Watson, if there is nothing else."

                                                "I think that I had better go, Holmes."

                                                "Not a bit, Doctor. Stay where you are. I am lost without my Boswell. And this promises to be interesting. It would be a pity to miss it."

                                                "But your client--"

                                                "Never mind him. I may want your help, and so may he. Here he comes. Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your best attention."

                                                A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and in the passage, paused immediately outside the door. Then there was a loud and authoritative tap.

                                                "Come in!" said Holmes.

                                                A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six inches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules. His dress was rich with a richness which would, in England, be looked upon as akin to bad taste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed across the sleeves and fronts of his double-breasted coat, while the deep blue cloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined with flame-coloured silk and secured at the neck with a brooch which consisted of a single flaming beryl. Boots which extended halfway up his calves, and which were trimmed at the tops with rich brown fur, completed the impression of barbaric opulence which was suggested by his whole appearance. He carried a broad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore across the upper part of his face, extending down past the cheekbones, a black vizard mask, which he had apparently adjusted that very moment, for his hand was still raised to it as he entered. From the lower part of the face he appeared to be a man of strong character, with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chin suggestive of resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.

                                                "You had my note?" he asked with a deep harsh voice and a strongly marked German accent. "I told you that I would call." He looked from one to the other of us, as if uncertain which to address.

                                                "Pray take a seat," said Holmes. "This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my cases. Whom have I the honour to address?"

                                                "You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman. I understand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honour and discretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most extreme importance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate with you alone."

                                                I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back into my chair. "It is both, or none," said he. "You may say before this gentleman anything which you may say to me."

                                                The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. "Then I must begin," said he, "by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the end of that time the matter will be of no importance. At present it is not too much to say that it is of such weight it may have an influence upon European history."

                                                "I promise," said Holmes.

                                                "And I."

                                                "You will excuse this mask," continued our strange visitor. "The august person who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you, and I may confess at once that the title by which I have just called myself is not exactly my own."

                                                "I was aware of it," said Holmes dryly.

                                                "The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has to be taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal and seriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe. To speak plainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein, hereditary kings of Bohemia."

                                                "I was also aware of that," murmured Holmes, settling himself down in his armchair and closing his eyes.

                                                Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid, lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him as the most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe. Holmes slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his gigantic client.

                                                "If your Majesty would condescend to state your case," he remarked, "I should be better able to advise you."

                                                The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room in uncontrollable agitation. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he tore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground. "You are right," he cried; "I am the King. Why should I attempt to conceal it?"

                                                "Why, indeed?" murmured Holmes. "Your Majesty had not spoken before I was aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond von Ormstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and hereditary King of Bohemia."

                                                "But you can understand," said our strange visitor, sitting down once more and passing his hand over his high white forehead, "you can understand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my own person. Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it to an agent without putting myself in his power. I have come incognito from Prague for the purpose of consulting you."

                                                "Then, pray consult," said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.

                                                "The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a lengthy visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known adventuress, Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you."

                                                "Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor," murmured Holmes without opening his eyes. For many years he had adopted a system of docketing all paragraphs concerning men and things, so that it was difficult to name a subject or a person on which he could not at once furnish information. In this case I found her biography sandwiched in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-commander who had written a monograph upon the deep-sea fishes.

                                                "Let me see!" said Holmes. "Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year 1858. Contralto--hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera of Warsaw--yes! Retired from operatic stage--ha! Living in London--quite so! Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangled with this young person, wrote her some compromising letters, and is now desirous of getting those letters back."

                                                "Precisely so. But how--"

                                                "Was there a secret marriage?"

                                                "None."

                                                "No legal papers or certificates?"

                                                "None."

                                                "Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If this young person should produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she to prove their authenticity?"

                                                "There is the writing."

                                                "Pooh, pooh! Forgery."

                                                "My private note-paper."

                                                "Stolen."

                                                "My own seal."

                                                "Imitated."

                                                "My photograph."

                                                "Bought."

                                                "We were both in the photograph."

                                                "Oh, dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed an indiscretion."

                                                "I was mad--insane."

                                                "You have compromised yourself seriously."

                                                "I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I am but thirty now."

                                                "It must be recovered."

                                                "We have tried and failed."

                                                "Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought."

                                                "She will not sell."

                                                "Stolen, then."

                                                "Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked her house. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice she has been waylaid. There has been no result."

                                                "No sign of it?"

                                                "Absolutely none."

                                                Holmes laughed. "It is quite a pretty little problem," said he.

                                                "But a very serious one to me," returned the King reproachfully.

                                                "Very, indeed. And what does she propose to do with the photograph?"

                                                "To ruin me."

                                                "But how?"

                                                "I am about to be married."

                                                "So I have heard."

                                                "To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of the King of Scandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her family. She is herself the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to my conduct would bring the matter to an end."

                                                "And Irene Adler?"

                                                "Threatens to send them the photograph. And she will do it. I know that she will do it. You do not know her, but she has a soul of steel. She has the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mind of the most resolute of men. Rather than I should marry another woman, there are no lengths to which she would not go--none."

                                                "You are sure that she has not sent it yet?"

                                                "I am sure."

                                                "And why?"

                                                "Because she has said that she would send it on the day when the betrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday."

                                                "Oh, then we have three days yet," said Holmes with a yawn. "That is very fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to look into just at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London for the present?"

                                                "Certainly. You will find me at the Langham under the name of the Count Von Kramm."

                                                "Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress."

                                                "Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety."

                                                "Then, as to money?"

                                                "You have carte blanche."

                                                "Absolutely?"

                                                "I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom to have that photograph."

                                                "And for present expenses?"

                                                The King took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak and laid it on the table.

                                                "There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes," he said.

                                                Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book and handed it to him.

                                                "And Mademoiselle's address?" he asked.

                                                "Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John's Wood."

                                                Holmes took a note of it. "One other question," said he. "Was the photograph a cabinet?"

                                                "It was."

                                                "Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon have some good news for you. And good-night, Watson," he added, as the wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. "If you will be good enough to call to-morrow afternoon at three o'clock I should like to chat this little matter over with you."

                                                II.


                                                At three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had not yet returned. The landlady informed me that he had left the house shortly after eight o'clock in the morning. I sat down beside the fire, however, with the intention of awaiting him, however long he might be. I was already deeply interested in his inquiry, for, though it was surrounded by none of the grim and strange features which were associated with the two crimes which I have already recorded, still, the nature of the case and the exalted station of his client gave it a character of its own. Indeed, apart from the nature of the investigation which my friend had on hand, there was something in his masterly grasp of a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning, which made it a pleasure to me to study his system of work, and to follow the quick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the most inextricable mysteries. So accustomed was I to his invariable success that the very possibility of his failing had ceased to enter into my head.

                                                It was close upon four before the door opened, and a drunken-looking groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an inflamed face and disreputable clothes, walked into the room. Accustomed as I was to my friend's amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to look three times before I was certain that it was indeed he. With a nod he vanished into the bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutes tweed-suited and respectable, as of old. Putting his hands into his pockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire and laughed heartily for some minutes.

                                                "Well, really!" he cried, and then he choked and laughed again until he was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the chair.

                                                "What is it?"

                                                "It's quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I employed my morning, or what I ended by doing."

                                                "I can'splitSize imagine. I suppose that you have been watching the habits, and perhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler."

                                                "Quite so; but the sequel was rather unusual. I will tell you, however. I left the house a little after eight o'clock this morning in the character of a groom out of work. There is a wonderful sympathy and freemasonry among horsey men. Be one of them, and you will know all that there is to know. I soon found Briony Lodge. It is a bijou villa, with a garden at the back, but built out in front right up to the road, two stories. Chubb lock to the door. Large sitting-room on the right side, well furnished, with long windows almost to the floor, and those preposterous English window fasteners which a child could open. Behind there was nothing remarkable, save that the passage window could be reached from the top of the coach-house. I walked round it and examined it closely from every point of view, but without noting anything else of interest.

                                                "I then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, that there was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden. I lent the ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses, and received in exchange twopence, a glass of half-and-half, two fills of shag tobacco, and as much information as I could desire about Miss Adler, to say nothing of half a dozen other people in the neighbourhood in whom I was not in the least interested, but whose biographies I was compelled to listen to."

                                                "And what of Irene Adler?" I asked.

                                                "Oh, she has turned all the men's heads down in that part. She is the daintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet. So say the Serpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sings at concerts, drives out at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for dinner. Seldom goes out at other times, except when she sings. Has only one male visitor, but a good deal of him. He is dark, handsome, and dashing, never calls less than once a day, and often twice. He is a Mr. Godfrey Norton, of the Inner Temple. See the advantages of a cabman as a confidant. They had driven him home a dozen times from Serpentine-mews, and knew all about him. When I had listened to all they had to tell, I began to walk up and down near Briony Lodge once more, and to think over my plan of campaign.

                                                "This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in the matter. He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous. What was the relation between them, and what the object of his repeated visits? Was she his client, his friend, or his mistress? If the former, she had probably transferred the photograph to his keeping. If the latter, it was less likely. On the issue of this question depended whether I should continue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to the gentleman's chambers in the Temple. It was a delicate point, and it widened the field of my inquiry. I fear that I bore you with these details, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you are to understand the situation."

                                                "I am following you closely," I answered.

                                                "I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom cab drove up to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a remarkably handsome man, dark, aquiline, and moustached--evidently the man of whom I had heard. He appeared to be in a great hurry, shouted to the cabman to wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door with the air of a man who was thoroughly at home.

                                                "He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch glimpses of him in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and down, talking excitedly, and waving his arms. Of her I could see nothing. Presently he emerged, looking even more flurried than before. As he stepped up to the cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket and looked at it earnestly, 'Drive like the devil,' he shouted, 'first to Gross & Hankey's in Regent Street, and then to the Church of St. Monica in the Edgeware Road. Half a guinea if you do it in twenty minutes!'

                                                "Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not do well to follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau, the coachman with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie under his ear, while all the tags of his harness were sticking out of the buckles. It hadn'splitSize pulled up before she shot out of the hall door and into it. I only caught a glimpse of her at the moment, but she was a lovely woman, with a face that a man might die for.

                                                " 'The Church of St. Monica, John,' she cried, 'and half a sovereign if you reach it in twenty minutes.'

                                                "This was quite too good to lose, Watson. I was just balancing whether I should run for it, or whether I should perch behind her landau when a cab came through the street. The driver looked twice at such a shabby fare, but I jumped in before he could object. 'The Church of St. Monica,' said I, 'and half a sovereign if you reach it in twenty minutes.' It was twenty-five minutes to twelve, and of course it was clear enough what was in the wind.

                                                "My cabby drove fast. I don'splitSize think I ever drove faster, but the others were there before us. The cab and the landau with their steaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived. I paid the man and hurried into the church. There was not a soul there save the two whom I had followed and a surpliced clergyman, who seemed to be expostulating with them. They were all three standing in a knot in front of the altar. I lounged up the side aisle like any other idler who has dropped into a church. Suddenly, to my surprise, the three at the altar faced round to me, and Godfrey Norton came running as hard as he could towards me.

                                                " 'Thank God,' he cried. 'You'll do. Come! Come!'

                                                " 'What then?' I asked.

                                                " 'Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won'splitSize be legal.'

                                                "I was half-dragged up to the altar, and before I knew where I was I found myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, and vouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally assisting in the secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to Godfrey Norton, bachelor. It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentleman thanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while the clergyman beamed on me in front. It was the most preposterous position in which I ever found myself in my life, and it was the thought of it that started me laughing just now. It seems that there had been some informality about their license, that the clergyman absolutely refused to marry them without a witness of some sort, and that my lucky appearance saved the bridegroom from having to sally out into the streets in search of a best man. The bride gave me a sovereign, and I mean to wear it on my watch chain in memory of the occasion."

                                                "This is a very unexpected turn of affairs," said I; "and what then?"

                                                "Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if the pair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate very prompt and energetic measures on my part. At the church door, however, they separated, he driving back to the Temple, and she to her own house. 'I shall drive out in the park at five as usual,' she said as she left him. I heard no more. They drove away in different directions, and I went off to make my own arrangements."

                                                "Which are?"

                                                "Some cold beef and a glass of beer," he answered, ringing the bell. "I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busier still this evening. By the way, Doctor, I shall want your co-operation."

                                                "I shall be delighted."

                                                "You don'splitSize mind breaking the law?"

                                                "Not in the least."

                                                "Nor running a chance of arrest?"

                                                "Not in a good cause."

                                                "Oh, the cause is excellent!"

                                                "Then I am your man."

                                                "I was sure that I might rely on you."

                                                "But what is it you wish?"

                                                "When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear to you. Now," he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that our landlady had provided, "I must discuss it while I eat, for I have not much time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on the scene of action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from her drive at seven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her."

                                                "And what then?"

                                                "You must leave that to me. I have already arranged what is to occur. There is only one point on which I must insist. You must not interfere, come what may. You understand?"

                                                "I am to be neutral?"

                                                "To do nothing whatever. There will probably be some small unpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being conveyed into the house. Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting-room window will open. You are to station yourself close to that open window."

                                                "Yes."

                                                "You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you."

                                                "Yes."

                                                "And when I raise my hand--so--you will throw into the room what I give you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire. You quite follow me?"

                                                "Entirely."

                                                "It is nothing very formidable," he said, taking a long cigar-shaped roll from his pocket. "It is an ordinary plumber's smoke-rocket, fitted with a cap at either end to make it self-lighting. Your task is confined to that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will be taken up by quite a number of people. You may then walk to the end of the street, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes. I hope that I have made myself clear?"

                                                "I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, and at the signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of fire, and to wait you at the corner of the street."

                                                "Precisely."

                                                "Then you may entirely rely on me."

                                                "That is excellent. I think, perhaps, it is almost time that I prepare for the new role I have to play."

                                                He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes in the character of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist clergyman. His broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, his sympathetic smile, and general look of peering and benevolent curiosity were such as Mr. John Hare alone could have equalled. It was not merely that Holmes changed his costume. His expression, his manner, his very soul seemed to vary with every fresh part that he assumed. The stage lost a fine actor, even as science lost an acute reasoner, when he became a specialist in crime.

                                                It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it still wanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in Serpentine Avenue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being lighted as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the coming of its occupant. The house was just such as I had pictured it from Sherlock Holmes' succinct description, but the locality appeared to be less private than I expected. On the contrary, for a small street in a quiet neighbourhood, it was remarkably animated. There was a group of shabbily dressed men smoking and laughing in a corner, a scissors-grinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with a nurse-girl, and several well-dressed young men who were lounging up and down with cigars in their mouths.

                                                "You see," remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of the house, "this marriage rather simplifies matters. The photograph becomes a double-edged weapon now. The chances are that she would be as averse to its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client is to its coming to the eyes of his princess. Now the question is, Where are we to find the photograph?"

                                                "Where, indeed?"

                                                "It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her. It is cabinet size. Too large for easy concealment about a woman's dress. She knows that the King is capable of having her waylaid and searched. Two attempts of the sort have already been made. We may take it, then, that she does not carry it about with her."

                                                "Where, then?"

                                                "Her banker or her lawyer. There is that double possibility. But I am inclined to think neither. Women are naturally secretive, and they like to do their own secreting. Why should she hand it over to anyone else? She could trust her own guardianship, but she could not tell what indirect or political influence might be brought to bear upon a business man. Besides, remember that she had resolved to use it within a few days. It must be where she can lay her hands upon it. It must be in her own house."

                                                "But it has twice been burgled."

                                                "Pshaw! They did not know how to look."

                                                "But how will you look?"

                                                "I will not look."

                                                "What then?"

                                                "I will get her to show me."

                                                "But she will refuse."

                                                "She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is her carriage. Now carry out my orders to the letter."

                                                As he spoke the gleam of the sidelights of a carriage came round the curve of the avenue. It was a smart little landau which rattled up to the door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of the loafing men at the corner dashed forward to open the door in the hope of earning a copper, but was elbowed away by another loafer, who had rushed up with the same intention. A fierce quarrel broke out, which was increased by the two guardsmen, who took sides with one of the loungers, and by the scissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon the other side. A blow was struck, and in an instant the lady, who had stepped from her carriage, was the centre of a little knot of flushed and struggling men, who struck savagely at each other with their fists and sticks. Holmes dashed into the crowd to protect the lady; but, just as he reached her, he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the blood running freely down his face. At his fall the guardsmen took to their heels in one direction and the loungers in the other, while a number of better dressed people, who had watched the scuffle without taking part in it, crowded in to help the lady and to attend to the injured man. Irene Adler, as I will still call her, had hurried up the steps; but she stood at the top with her superb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, looking back into the street.

                                                "Is the poor gentleman much hurt?" she asked.

                                                "He is dead," cried several voices.

                                                "No, no, there's life in him!" shouted another. "But he'll be gone before you can get him to hospital."

                                                "He's a brave fellow," said a woman. "They would have had the lady's purse and watch if it hadn'splitSize been for him. They were a gang, and a rough one, too. Ah, he's breathing now."

                                                "He can'splitSize lie in the street. May we bring him in, marm?"

                                                "Surely. Bring him into the sitting-room. There is a comfortable sofa. This way, please!"

                                                Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out in the principal room, while I still observed the proceedings from my post by the window. The lamps had been lit, but the blinds had not been drawn, so that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch. I do not know whether he was seized with compunction at that moment for the part he was playing, but I know that I never felt more heartily ashamed of myself in my life than when I saw the beautiful creature against whom I was conspiring, or the grace and kindliness with which she waited upon the injured man. And yet it would be the blackest treachery to Holmes to draw back now from the part which he had intrusted to me. I hardened my heart, and took the smoke-rocket from under my ulster. After all, I thought, we are not injuring her. We are but preventing her from injuring another.

                                                Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man who is in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the window. At the same instant I saw him raise his hand and at the signal I tossed my rocket into the room with a cry of "Fire!" The word was no sooner out of my mouth than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed and ill--gentlemen, ostlers, and servant maids--joined in a general shriek of "Fire!" Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room and out at the open window. I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a moment later the voice of Holmes from within assuring them that it was a false alarm. Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way to the corner of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my friend's arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar. He walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we had turned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards the Edgeware Road.

                                                "You did it very nicely, Doctor," he remarked. "Nothing could have been better. It is all right."

                                                "You have the photograph?"

                                                "I know where it is."

                                                "And how did you find out?"

                                                "She showed me, as I told you she would."

                                                "I am still in the dark."

                                                "I do not wish to make a mystery," said he, laughing. "The matter was perfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in the street was an accomplice. They were all engaged for the evening."

                                                "I guessed as much."

                                                "Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in the palm of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to my face, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick."

                                                "That also I could fathom."

                                                "Then they carried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else could she do? And into her sitting-room, which was the very room which I suspected. It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was determined to see which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air, they were compelled to open the window, and you had your chance."

                                                "How did that help you?"

                                                "It was all-important. When a woman thinks that her house is on fire, her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most. It is a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have more than once taken advantage of it. In the case of the Darlington Substitution Scandal it was of use to me, and also in the Arnsworth Castle business. A married woman grabs at her baby; an unmarried one reaches for her jewel-box. Now it was clear to me that our lady of to-day had nothing in the house more precious to her than what we are in quest of. She would rush to secure it. The alarm of fire was admirably done. The smoke and shouting were enough to shake nerves of steel. She responded beautifully. The photograph is in a recess behind a sliding panel just above the right bell-pull. She was there in an instant, and I caught a glimpse of it as she half drew it out. When I cried out that it was a false alarm, she replaced it, glanced at the rocket, rushed from the room, and I have not seen her since. I rose, and, making my excuses, escaped from the house. I hesitated whether to attempt to secure the photograph at once; but the coachman had come in, and as he was watching me narrowly, it seemed safer to wait. A little over-precipitance may ruin all."

                                                "And now?" I asked.

                                                "Our quest is practically finished. I shall call with the King to-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will be shown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probable that when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph. It might be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regain it with his own hands."

                                                "And when will you call?"

                                                "At eight in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have a clear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage may mean a complete change in her life and habits. I must wire to the King without delay."

                                                We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door. He was searching his pockets for the key when someone passing said:

                                                "Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes."

                                                There were several people on the pavement at the time, but the greeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who had hurried by.

                                                "I've heard that voice before," said Holmes, staring down the dimly lit street. "Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have been."

                                                III.


                                                I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon our toast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushed into the room.

                                                "You have really got it!" he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by either shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.

                                                "Not yet."

                                                "But you have hopes?"

                                                "I have hopes."

                                                "Then, come. I am all impatience to be gone."

                                                "We must have a cab."

                                                "No, my brougham is waiting."

                                                "Then that will simplify matters." We descended and started off once more for Briony Lodge.

                                                "Irene Adler is married," remarked Holmes.

                                                "Married! When?"

                                                "Yesterday."

                                                "But to whom?"

                                                "To an English lawyer named Norton."

                                                "But she could not love him."

                                                "I am in hopes that she does."

                                                "And why in hopes?"

                                                "Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future annoyance. If the lady loves her husband, she does not love your Majesty. If she does not love your Majesty, there is no reason why she should interfere with your Majesty's plan."

                                                "It is true. And yet--! Well! I wish she had been of my own station! What a queen she would have made!" He relapsed into a moody silence, which was not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue.

                                                The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood upon the steps. She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped from the brougham.

                                                "Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?" said she.

                                                "I am Mr. Holmes," answered my companion, looking at her with a questioning and rather startled gaze.

                                                "Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She left this morning with her husband by the 5:15 train from Charing Cross for the Continent."

                                                "What!" Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin and surprise. "Do you mean that she has left England?"

                                                "Never to return."

                                                "And the papers?" asked the King hoarsely. "All is lost."

                                                "We shall see." He pushed past the servant and rushed into the drawing-room, followed by the King and myself. The furniture was scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and open drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before her flight. Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small sliding shutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and a letter. The photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress, the letter was superscribed to "Sherlock Holmes, Esq. To be left till called for." My friend tore it open, and we all three read it together. It was dated at midnight of the preceding night and ran in this way:

                                                "MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,--You really did it very well. You took me in completely. Until after the alarm of fire, I had not a suspicion. But then, when I found how I had betrayed myself, I began to think. I had been warned against you months ago. I had been told that, if the King employed an agent, it would certainly be you. And your address had been given me. Yet, with all this, you made me reveal what you wanted to know. Even after I became suspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kind old clergyman. But, you know, I have been trained as an actress myself. Male costume is nothing new to me. I often take advantage of the freedom which it gives. I sent John, the coachman, to watch you, ran upstairs, got into my walking clothes, as I call them, and came down just as you departed.

                                                "Well, I followed you to your door, and so made sure that I was really an object of interest to the celebrated Mr. Sherlock Holmes. Then I, rather imprudently, wished you good-night, and started for the Temple to see my husband.

                                                "We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued by so formidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty when you call to-morrow. As to the photograph, your client may rest in peace. I love and am loved by a better man than he. The King may do what he will without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly wronged. I keep it only to safeguard myself, and to preserve a weapon which will always secure me from any steps which he might take in the future. I leave a photograph which he might care to possess; and I remain, dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes,


                                                "Very truly yours,
                                                "IRENE NORTON, nee ADLER."

                                                "What a woman--oh, what a woman!" cried the King of Bohemia, when we had all three read this epistle. "Did I not tell you how quick and resolute she was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? Is it not a pity that she was not on my level?"

                                                "From what I have seen of the lady, she seems, indeed, to be on a very different level to your Majesty," said Holmes coldly. "I am sorry that I have not been able to bring your Majesty's business to a more successful conclusion."

                                                "On the contrary, my dear sir," cried the King; "nothing could be more successful. I know that her word is inviolate. The photograph is now as safe as if it were in the fire."

                                                "I am glad to hear your Majesty say so."

                                                "I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can reward you. This ring--" He slipped an emerald snake ring from his finger and held it out upon the palm of his hand.

                                                "Your Majesty has something which I should value even more highly," said Holmes.

                                                "You have but to name it."

                                                "This photograph!"

                                                The King stared at him in amazement.

                                                "Irene's photograph!" he cried. "Certainly, if you wish it."

                                                "I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be done in the matter. I have the honour to wish you a very good morning." He bowed, and, turning away without observing the hand which the King had stretched out to him, he set off in my company for his chambers.

                                                And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom of Bohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were beaten by a woman's wit. He used to make merry over the cleverness of women, but I have not heard him do it of late. And when he speaks of Irene Adler, or when he refers to her photograph, it is always under the honourable title of the woman.

                                                ADVENTURE  II.  THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE


                                                I had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the autumn of last year and found him in deep conversation with a very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair. With an apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when Holmes pulled me abruptly into the room and closed the door behind me.

                                                "You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson," he said cordially.

                                                "I was afraid that you were engaged."

                                                "So I am. Very much so."

                                                "Then I can wait in the next room."

                                                "Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and helper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he will be of the utmost use to me in yours also."

                                                The stout gentleman half rose from his chair and gave a bob of greeting, with a quick little questioning glance from his small fat-encircled eyes.

                                                "Try the settee," said Holmes, relapsing into his armchair and putting his fingertips together, as was his custom when in judicial moods. "I know, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that is bizarre and outside the conventions and humdrum routine of everyday life. You have shown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which has prompted you to chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellish so many of my own little adventures."

                                                "Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me," I observed.

                                                "You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we went into the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, that for strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to life itself, which is always far more daring than any effort of the imagination."

                                                "A proposition which I took the liberty of doubting."

                                                "You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view, for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until your reason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right. Now, Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this morning, and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the most singular which I have listened to for some time. You have heard me remark that the strangest and most unique things are very often connected not with the larger but with the smaller crimes, and occasionally, indeed, where there is room for doubt whether any positive crime has been committed. As far as I have heard, it is impossible for me to say whether the present case is an instance of crime or not, but the course of events is certainly among the most singular that I have ever listened to. Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to recommence your narrative. I ask you not merely because my friend Dr. Watson has not heard the opening part but also because the peculiar nature of the story makes me anxious to have every possible detail from your lips. As a rule, when I have heard some slight indication of the course of events, I am able to guide myself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur to my memory. In the present instance I am forced to admit that the facts are, to the best of my belief, unique."

                                                The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of some little pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from the inside pocket of his greatcoat. As he glanced down the advertisement column, with his head thrust forward and the paper flattened out upon his knee, I took a good look at the man and endeavoured, after the fashion of my companion, to read the indications which might be presented by his dress or appearance.

                                                I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor bore every mark of being an average commonplace British tradesman, obese, pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey shepherd's check trousers, a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front, and a drab waistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a square pierced bit of metal dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brown overcoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him. Altogether, look as I would, there was nothing remarkable about the man save his blazing red head, and the expression of extreme chagrin and discontent upon his features.

                                                Sherlock Holmes' quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook his head with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances. "Beyond the obvious facts that he has at some time done manual labour, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has been in China, and that he has done a considerable amount of writing lately, I can deduce nothing else."

                                                Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefinger upon the paper, but his eyes upon my companion.

                                                "How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes?" he asked. "How did you know, for example, that I did manual labour. It's as true as gospel, for I began as a ship's carpenter."

                                                "Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger than your left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are more developed."

                                                "Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?"

                                                "I won'splitSize insult your intelligence by telling you how I read that, especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, you use an arc-and-compass breastpin."

                                                "Ah, of course, I forgot that. But the writing?"

                                                "What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny for five inches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the elbow where you rest it upon the desk?"

                                                "Well, but China?"

                                                "The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right wrist could only have been done in China. I have made a small study of tattoo marks and have even contributed to the literature of the subject. That trick of staining the fishes' scales of a delicate pink is quite peculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coin hanging from your watch-chain, the matter becomes even more simple."

                                                Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. "Well, I never!" said he. "I thought at first that you had done something clever, but I see that there was nothing in it after all."

                                                "I begin to think, Watson," said Holmes, "that I make a mistake in explaining. 'Omne ignotum pro magnifico,' you know, and my poor little reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am so candid. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr. Wilson?"

                                                "Yes, I have got it now," he answered with his thick red finger planted halfway down the column. "Here it is. This is what began it all. You just read it for yourself, sir."

                                                I took the paper from him and read as follows:

                                                "TO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On account of the bequest of the late Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U. S. A., there is now another vacancy open which entitles a member of the League to a salary of $4 a week for purely nominal services. All red-headed men who are sound in body and mind and above the age of twenty-one years, are eligible. Apply in person on Monday, at eleven o'clock, to Duncan Ross, at the offices of the League, 7 Pope's Court, Fleet Street."

                                                "What on earth does this mean?" I ejaculated after I had twice read over the extraordinary announcement.

                                                Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when in high spirits. "It is a little off the beaten track, isn'splitSize it?" said he. "And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us all about yourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement had upon your fortunes. You will first make a note, Doctor, of the paper and the date."

                                                "It is The Morning Chronicle of April 27, 1890. Just two months ago."

                                                "Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?"

                                                "Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; "I have a small pawnbroker's business at Coburg Square, near the City. It's not a very large affair, and of late years it has not done more than just give me a living. I used to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep one; and I would have a job to pay him but that he is willing to come for half wages so as to learn the business."

                                                "What is the name of this obliging youth?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

                                                "His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he's not such a youth, either. It's hard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr. Holmes; and I know very well that he could better himself and earn twice what I am able to give him. But, after all, if he is satisfied, why should I put ideas in his head?"

                                                "Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in having an employe who comes under the full market price. It is not a common experience among employers in this age. I don'splitSize know that your assistant is not as remarkable as your advertisement."

                                                "Oh, he has his faults, too," said Mr. Wilson. "Never was such a fellow for photography. Snapping away with a camera when he ought to be improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar like a rabbit into its hole to develop his pictures. That is his main fault, but on the whole he's a good worker. There's no vice in him."

                                                "He is still with you, I presume?"

                                                "Yes, sir. He and a girl of fourteen, who does a bit of simple cooking and keeps the place clean--that's all I have in the house, for I am a widower and never had any family. We live very quietly, sir, the three of us; and we keep a roof over our heads and pay our debts, if we do nothing more.

                                                "The first thing that put us out was that advertisement. Spaulding, he came down into the office just this day eight weeks, with this very paper in his hand, and he says:

                                                " 'I wish to the Lord, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.'

                                                " 'Why that?' I asks.

                                                " 'Why,' says he, 'here's another vacancy on the League of the Red-headed Men. It's worth quite a little fortune to any man who gets it, and I understand that there are more vacancies than there are men, so that the trustees are at their wits' end what to do with the money. If my hair would only change colour, here's a nice little crib all ready for me to step into.'

                                                " 'Why, what is it, then?' I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a very stay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of my having to go to it, I was often weeks on end without putting my foot over the door-mat. In that way I didn'splitSize know much of what was going on outside, and I was always glad of a bit of news.

                                                " 'Have you never heard of the League of the Red-headed Men?' he asked with his eyes open.

                                                " 'Never.'

                                                " 'Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for one of the vacancies.'

                                                " 'And what are they worth?' I asked.

                                                " 'Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the work is slight, and it need not interfere very much with one's other occupations.'

                                                "Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears, for the business has not been over good for some years, and an extra couple of hundred would have been very handy.

                                                " 'Tell me all about it,' said I.

                                                " 'Well,' said he, showing me the advertisement, 'you can see for yourself that the League has a vacancy, and there is the address where you should apply for particulars. As far as I can make out, the League was founded by an American millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, who was very peculiar in his ways. He was himself red-headed, and he had a great sympathy for all red-headed men; so, when he died, it was found that he had left his enormous fortune in the hands of trustees, with instructions to apply the interest to the providing of easy berths to men whose hair is of that colour. From all I hear it is splendid pay and very little to do.'

                                                " 'But,' said I, 'there would be millions of red-headed men who would apply.'

                                                " 'Not so many as you might think,' he answered. 'You see it is really confined to Londoners, and to grown men. This American had started from London when he was young, and he wanted to do the old town a good turn. Then, again, I have heard it is no use your applying if your hair is light red, or dark red, or anything but real bright, blazing, fiery red. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr. Wilson, you would just walk in; but perhaps it would hardly be worth your while to put yourself out of the way for the sake of a few hundred pounds.'

                                                "Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves, that my hair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that if there was to be any competition in the matter I stood as good a chance as any man that I had ever met. Vincent Spaulding seemed to know so much about it that I thought he might prove useful, so I just ordered him to put up the shutters for the day and to come right away with me. He was very willing to have a holiday, so we shut the business up and started off for the address that was given us in the advertisement.

                                                "I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. From north, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in his hair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement. Fleet Street was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope's Court looked like a coster's orange barrow. I should not have thought there were so many in the whole country as were brought together by that single advertisement. Every shade of colour they were--straw, lemon, orange, brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there were not many who had the real vivid flame-coloured tint. When I saw how many were waiting, I would have given it up in despair; but Spaulding would not hear of it. How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushed and pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and right up to the steps which led to the office. There was a double stream upon the stair, some going up in hope, and some coming back dejected; but we wedged in as well as we could and soon found ourselves in the office."

                                                "Your experience has been a most entertaining one," remarked Holmes as his client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge pinch of snuff. "Pray continue your very interesting statement."

                                                "There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chairs and a deal table, behind which sat a small man with a head that was even redder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate as he came up, and then he always managed to find some fault in them which would disqualify them. Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such a very easy matter, after all. However, when our turn came the little man was much more favourable to me than to any of the others, and he closed the door as we entered, so that he might have a private word with us.

                                                " 'This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,' said my assistant, 'and he is willing to fill a vacancy in the League.'

                                                " 'And he is admirably suited for it,' the other answered. 'He has every requirement. I cannot recall when I have seen anything so fine.' He took a step backward, cocked his head on one side, and gazed at my hair until I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly he plunged forward, wrung my hand, and congratulated me warmly on my success.

                                                " 'It would be injustice to hesitate,' said he. 'You will, however, I am sure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution.' With that he seized my hair in both his hands, and tugged until I yelled with the pain. 'There is water in your eyes,' said he as he released me. 'I perceive that all is as it should be. But we have to be careful, for we have twice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tell you tales of cobbler's wax which would disgust you with human nature.' He stepped over to the window and shouted through it at the top of his voice that the vacancy was filled. A groan of disappointment came up from below, and the folk all trooped away in different directions until there was not a red-head to be seen except my own and that of the manager.

                                                " 'My name,' said he, 'is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of the pensioners upon the fund left by our noble benefactor. Are you a married man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?'

                                                "I answered that I had not.

                                                "His face fell immediately.

                                                " 'Dear me!' he said gravely, 'that is very serious indeed! I am sorry to hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the propagation and spread of the red-heads as well as for their maintenance. It is exceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.'

                                                "My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was not to have the vacancy after all; but after thinking it over for a few minutes he said that it would be all right.

                                                " 'In the case of another,' said he, 'the objection might be fatal, but we must stretch a point in favour of a man with such a head of hair as yours. When shall you be able to enter upon your new duties?'

                                                " 'Well, it is a little awkward, for I have a business already,' said I.

                                                " 'Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson!' said Vincent Spaulding. 'I should be able to look after that for you.'

                                                " 'What would be the hours?' I asked.

                                                " 'Ten to two.'

                                                "Now a pawnbroker's business is mostly done of an evening, Mr. Holmes, especially Thursday and Friday evening, which is just before pay-day; so it would suit me very well to earn a little in the mornings. Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man, and that he would see to anything that turned up.

                                                " 'That would suit me very well,' said I. 'And the pay?'

                                                " 'Is $4 a week.'

                                                " 'And the work?'

                                                " 'Is purely nominal.'

                                                " 'What do you call purely nominal?'

                                                " 'Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the building, the whole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole position forever. The will is very clear upon that point. You don'splitSize comply with the conditions if you budge from the office during that time.'

                                                " 'It's only four hours a day, and I should not think of leaving,' said I.

                                                " 'No excuse will avail,' said Mr. Duncan Ross; 'neither sickness nor business nor anything else. There you must stay, or you lose your billet.'

                                                " 'And the work?'

                                                " 'Is to copy out the Encyclopaedia Britannica. There is the first volume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, and blotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. Will you be ready to-morrow?'

                                                " 'Certainly,' I answered.

                                                " 'Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you once more on the important position which you have been fortunate enough to gain.' He bowed me out of the room and I went home with my assistant, hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my own good fortune.

                                                "Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was in low spirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the whole affair must be some great hoax or fraud, though what its object might be I could not imagine. It seemed altogether past belief that anyone could make such a will, or that they would pay such a sum for doing anything so simple as copying out the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Vincent Spaulding did what he could to cheer me up, but by bedtime I had reasoned myself out of the whole thing. However, in the morning I determined to have a look at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle of ink, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, I started off for Pope's Court.

                                                "Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right as possible. The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Ross was there to see that I got fairly to work. He started me off upon the letter A, and then he left me; but he would drop in from time to time to see that all was right with me. At two o'clock he bade me good-day, complimented me upon the amount that I had written, and locked the door of the office after me.

                                                "This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday the manager came in and planked down four golden sovereigns for my week's work. It was the same next week, and the same the week after. Every morning I was there at ten, and every afternoon I left at two. By degrees Mr. Duncan Ross took to coming in only once of a morning, and then, after a time, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, I never dared to leave the room for an instant, for I was not sure when he might come, and the billet was such a good one, and suited me so well, that I would not risk the loss of it.

                                                "Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots and Archery and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and hoped with diligence that I might get on to the B's before very long. It cost me something in foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with my writings. And then suddenly the whole business came to an end."

                                                "To an end?"

                                                "Yes, sir. And no later than this morning. I went to my work as usual at ten o'clock, but the door was shut and locked, with a little square of cardboard hammered on to the middle of the panel with a tack. Here it is, and you can read for yourself."

                                                He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheet of note-paper. It read in this fashion:


                                                THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE

                                                IS

                                                DISSOLVED.

                                                October 9, 1890.


                                                Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the rueful face behind it, until the comical side of the affair so completely overtopped every other consideration that we both burst out into a roar of laughter.

                                                "I cannot see that there is anything very funny," cried our client, flushing up to the roots of his flaming head. "If you can do nothing better than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere."

                                                "No, no," cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from which he had half risen. "I really wouldn'splitSize miss your case for the world. It is most refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you will excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it. Pray what steps did you take when you found the card upon the door?"

                                                "I was staggered, sir. I did not know what to do. Then I called at the offices round, but none of them seemed to know anything about it. Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an accountant living on the ground floor, and I asked him if he could tell me what had become of the Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any such body. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that the name was new to him.

                                                " 'Well,' said I, 'the gentleman at No. 4.'

                                                " 'What, the red-headed man?'

                                                " 'Yes.'

                                                " 'Oh,' said he, 'his name was William Morris. He was a solicitor and was using my room as a temporary convenience until his new premises were ready. He moved out yesterday.'

                                                " 'Where could I find him?'

                                                " 'Oh, at his new offices. He did tell me the address. Yes, 17 King Edward Street, near St. Paul's.'

                                                "I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was a manufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard of either Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross."

                                                "And what did you do then?" asked Holmes.

                                                "I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of my assistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say that if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite good enough, Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place without a struggle, so, as I had heard that you were good enough to give advice to poor folk who were in need of it, I came right away to you."

                                                "And you did very wisely," said Holmes. "Your case is an exceedingly remarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what you have told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang from it than might at first sight appear."

                                                "Grave enough!" said Mr. Jabez Wilson. "Why, I have lost four pound a week."

                                                "As far as you are personally concerned," remarked Holmes, "I do not see that you have any grievance against this extraordinary league. On the contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some $30, to say nothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on every subject which comes under the letter A. You have lost nothing by them."

                                                "No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are, and what their object was in playing this prank--if it was a prank--upon me. It was a pretty expensive joke for them, for it cost them two and thirty pounds."

                                                "We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you. And, first, one or two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who first called your attention to the advertisement--how long had he been with you?"

                                                "About a month then."

                                                "How did he come?"

                                                "In answer to an advertisement."

                                                "Was he the only applicant?"

                                                "No, I had a dozen."

                                                "Why did you pick him?"

                                                "Because he was handy and would come cheap."

                                                "At half wages, in fact."

                                                "Yes."

                                                "What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?"

                                                "Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face, though he's not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon his forehead."

                                                Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. "I thought as much," said he. "Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced for earrings?"

                                                "Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when he was a lad."

                                                "Hum!" said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. "He is still with you?"

                                                "Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him."

                                                "And has your business been attended to in your absence?"

                                                "Nothing to complain of, sir. There's never very much to do of a morning."

                                                "That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opinion upon the subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday, and I hope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion."

                                                "Well, Watson," said Holmes when our visitor had left us, "what do you make of it all?"

                                                "I make nothing of it," I answered frankly. "It is a most mysterious business."

                                                "As a rule," said Holmes, "the more bizarre a thing is the less mysterious it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featureless crimes which are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is the most difficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this matter."

                                                "What are you going to do, then?" I asked.

                                                "To smoke," he answered. "It is quite a three pipe problem, and I beg that you won'splitSize speak to me for fifty minutes." He curled himself up in his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, and there he sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pipe thrusting out like the bill of some strange bird. I had come to the conclusion that he had dropped asleep, and indeed was nodding myself, when he suddenly sprang out of his chair with the gesture of a man who has made up his mind and put his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.

                                                "Sarasate plays at the St. James's Hall this afternoon," he remarked. "What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare you for a few hours?"

                                                "I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is never very absorbing."

                                                "Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the City first, and we can have some lunch on the way. I observe that there is a good deal of German music on the programme, which is rather more to my taste than Italian or French. It is introspective, and I want to introspect. Come along!"

                                                We travelled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short walk took us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singular story which we had listened to in the morning. It was a poky, little, shabby-genteel place, where four lines of dingy two-storied brick houses looked out into a small railed-in enclosure, where a lawn of weedy grass and a few clumps of faded laurel bushes made a hard fight against a smoke-laden and uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls and a brown board with "JABEZ WILSON" in white letters, upon a corner house, announced the place where our red-headed client carried on his business. Sherlock Holmes stopped in front of it with his head on one side and looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly between puckered lids. Then he walked slowly up the street, and then down again to the corner, still looking keenly at the houses. Finally he returned to the pawnbroker's, and, having thumped vigorously upon the pavement with his stick two or three times, he went up to the door and knocked. It was instantly opened by a bright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to step in.

                                                "Thank you," said Holmes, "I only wished to ask you how you would go from here to the Strand."

                                                "Third right, fourth left," answered the assistant promptly, closing the door.

                                                "Smart fellow, that," observed Holmes as we walked away. "He is, in my judgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I am not sure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known something of him before."

                                                "Evidently," said I, "Mr. Wilson's assistant counts for a good deal in this mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you inquired your way merely in order that you might see him."

                                                "Not him."

                                                "What then?"

                                                "The knees of his trousers."

                                                "And what did you see?"

                                                "What I expected to see."

                                                "Why did you beat the pavement?"

                                                "My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We are spies in an enemy's country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square. Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it."

                                                The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner from the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast to it as the front of a picture does to the back. It was one of the main arteries which conveyed the traffic of the City to the north and west. The roadway was blocked with the immense stream of commerce flowing in a double tide inward and outward, while the footpaths were black with the hurrying swarm of pedestrians. It was difficult to realise as we looked at the line of fine shops and stately business premises that they really abutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnant square which we had just quitted.

                                                "Let me see," said Holmes, standing at the corner and glancing along the line, "I should like just to remember the order of the houses here. It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of London. There is Mortimer's, the tobacconist, the little newspaper shop, the Coburg branch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian Restaurant, and McFarlane's carriage-building depot. That carries us right on to the other block. And now, Doctor, we've done our work, so it's time we had some play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land, where all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are no red-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums."

                                                My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a very capable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit. All the afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happiness, gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while his gently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike those of Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes the relentless, keen-witted, ready-handed criminal agent, as it was possible to conceive. In his singular character the dual nature alternately asserted itself, and his extreme exactness and astuteness represented, as I have often thought, the reaction against the poetic and contemplative mood which occasionally predominated in him. The swing of his nature took him from extreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he was never so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been lounging in his armchair amid his improvisations and his black-letter editions. Then it was that the lust of the chase would suddenly come upon him, and that his brilliant reasoning power would rise to the level of intuition, until those who were unacquainted with his methods would look askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was not that of other mortals. When I saw him that afternoon so enwrapped in the music at St. James's Hall I felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom he had set himself to hunt down.

                                                "You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor," he remarked as we emerged.

                                                "Yes, it would be as well."

                                                "And I have some business to do which will take some hours. This business at Coburg Square is serious."

                                                "Why serious?"

                                                "A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason to believe that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being Saturday rather complicates matters. I shall want your help to-night."

                                                "At what time?"

                                                "Ten will be early enough."

                                                "I shall be at Baker Street at ten."

                                                "Very well. And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little danger, so kindly put your army revolver in your pocket." He waved his hand, turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the crowd.

                                                I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbours, but I was always oppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings with Sherlock Holmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had seen what he had seen, and yet from his words it was evident that he saw clearly not only what had happened but what was about to happen, while to me the whole business was still confused and grotesque. As I drove home to my house in Kensington I thought over it all, from the extraordinary story of the red-headed copier of the Encyclopaedia down to the visit to Saxe-Coburg Square, and the ominous words with which he had parted from me. What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should I go armed? Where were we going, and what were we to do? I had the hint from Holmes that this smooth-faced pawnbroker's assistant was a formidable man--a man who might play a deep game. I tried to puzzle it out, but gave it up in despair and set the matter aside until night should bring an explanation.

                                                It was a quarter-past nine when I started from home and made my way across the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker Street. Two hansoms were standing at the door, and as I entered the passage I heard the sound of voices from above. On entering his room, I found Holmes in animated conversation with two men, one of whom I recognised as Peter Jones, the official police agent, while the other was a long, thin, sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat and oppressively respectable frock-coat.

                                                "Ha! Our party is complete," said Holmes, buttoning up his pea-jacket and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack. "Watson, I think you know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me introduce you to Mr. Merryweather, who is to be our companion in to-night's adventure."

                                                "We're hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see," said Jones in his consequential way. "Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting a chase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the running down."

                                                "I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase," observed Mr. Merryweather gloomily.

                                                "You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir," said the police agent loftily. "He has his own little methods, which are, if he won'splitSize mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical and fantastic, but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not too much to say that once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder and the Agra treasure, he has been more nearly correct than the official force."

                                                "Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right," said the stranger with deference. "Still, I confess that I miss my rubber. It is the first Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I have not had my rubber."

                                                "I think you will find," said Sherlock Holmes, "that you will play for a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and that the play will be more exciting. For you, Mr. Merryweather, the stake will be some $30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom you wish to lay your hands."

                                                "John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. He's a young man, Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his profession, and I would rather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London. He's a remarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a royal duke, and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford. His brain is as cunning as his fingers, and though we meet signs of him at every turn, we never know where to find the man himself. He'll crack a crib in Scotland one week, and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next. I've been on his track for years and have never set eyes on him yet."

                                                "I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night. I've had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree with you that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten, however, and quite time that we started. If you two will take the first hansom, Watson and I will follow in the second."

                                                Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive and lay back in the cab humming the tunes which he had heard in the afternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit streets until we emerged into Farrington Street.

                                                "We are close there now," my friend remarked. "This fellow Merryweather is a bank director, and personally interested in the matter. I thought it as well to have Jones with us also. He is not a bad fellow, though an absolute imbecile in his profession. He has one positive virtue. He is as brave as a bulldog and as tenacious as a lobster if he gets his claws upon anyone. Here we are, and they are waiting for us."

                                                We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had found ourselves in the morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and, following the guidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down a narrow passage and through a side door, which he opened for us. Within there was a small corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also was opened, and led down a flight of winding stone steps, which terminated at another formidable gate. Mr. Merryweather stopped to light a lantern, and then conducted us down a dark, earth-smelling passage, and so, after opening a third door, into a huge vault or cellar, which was piled all round with crates and massive boxes.

                                                "You are not very vulnerable from above," Holmes remarked as he held up the lantern and gazed about him.

                                                "Nor from below," said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon the flags which lined the floor. "Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!" he remarked, looking up in surprise.

                                                "I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!" said Holmes severely. "You have already imperilled the whole success of our expedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit down upon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?"

                                                The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a very injured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his knees upon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens, began to examine minutely the cracks between the stones. A few seconds sufficed to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again and put his glass in his pocket.

                                                "We have at least an hour before us," he remarked, "for they can hardly take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed. Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their work the longer time they will have for their escape. We are at present, Doctor--as no doubt you have divined--in the cellar of the City branch of one of the principal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the chairman of directors, and he will explain to you that there are reasons why the more daring criminals of London should take a considerable interest in this cellar at present."

                                                "It is our French gold," whispered the director. "We have had several warnings that an attempt might be made upon it."

                                                "Your French gold?"

                                                "Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources and borrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France. It has become known that we have never had occasion to unpack the money, and that it is still lying in our cellar. The crate upon which I sit contains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil. Our reserve of bullion is much larger at present than is usually kept in a single branch office, and the directors have had misgivings upon the subject."

                                                "Which were very well justified," observed Holmes. "And now it is time that we arranged our little plans. I expect that within an hour matters will come to a head. In the meantime Mr. Merryweather, we must put the screen over that dark lantern."

                                                "And sit in the dark?"

                                                "I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and I thought that, as we were a partie carree, you might have your rubber after all. But I see that the enemy's preparations have gone so far that we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, we must choose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shall take them at a disadvantage, they may do us some harm unless we are careful. I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal yourselves behind those. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly. If they fire, Watson, have no compunction about shooting them down."

                                                I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case behind which I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front of his lantern and left us in pitch darkness--such an absolute darkness as I have never before experienced. The smell of hot metal remained to assure us that the light was still there, ready to flash out at a moment's notice. To me, with my nerves worked up to a pitch of expectancy, there was something depressing and subduing in the sudden gloom, and in the cold dank air of the vault.

                                                "They have but one retreat," whispered Holmes. "That is back through the house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have done what I asked you, Jones?"

                                                "I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door."

                                                "Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be silent and wait."

                                                What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but an hour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night must have almost gone, and the dawn be breaking above us. My limbs were weary and stiff, for I feared to change my position; yet my nerves were worked up to the highest pitch of tension, and my hearing was so acute that I could not only hear the gentle breathing of my companions, but I could distinguish the deeper, heavier in-breath of the bulky Jones from the thin, sighing note of the bank director. From my position I could look over the case in the direction of the floor. Suddenly my eyes caught the glint of a light.

                                                At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then it lengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then, without any warning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand appeared, a white, almost womanly hand, which felt about in the centre of the little area of light. For a minute or more the hand, with its writhing fingers, protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn as suddenly as it appeared, and all was dark again save the single lurid spark which marked a chink between the stones.

                                                Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending, tearing sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon its side and left a square, gaping hole, through which streamed the light of a lantern. Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut, boyish face, which looked keenly about it, and then, with a hand on either side of the aperture, drew itself shoulder-high and waist-high, until one knee rested upon the edge. In another instant he stood at the side of the hole and was hauling after him a companion, lithe and small like himself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair.

                                                "It's all clear," he whispered. "Have you the chisel and the bags? Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump, and I'll swing for it!"

                                                Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the collar. The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of rending cloth as Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed upon the barrel of a revolver, but Holmes' hunting crop came down on the man's wrist, and the pistol clinked upon the stone floor.

                                                "It's no use, John Clay," said Holmes blandly. "You have no chance at all."

                                                "So I see," the other answered with the utmost coolness. "I fancy that my pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails."

                                                "There are three men waiting for him at the door," said Holmes.

                                                "Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing very completely. I must compliment you."

                                                "And I you," Holmes answered. "Your red-headed idea was very new and effective."

                                                "You'll see your pal again presently," said Jones. "He's quicker at climbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the derbies."

                                                "I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands," remarked our prisoner as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists. "You may not be aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness, also, when you address me always to say 'sir' and 'please.' "

                                                "All right," said Jones with a stare and a snigger. "Well, would you please, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry your Highness to the police-station?"

                                                "That is better," said John Clay serenely. He made a sweeping bow to the three of us and walked quietly off in the custody of the detective.

                                                "Really, Mr. Holmes," said Mr. Merryweather as we followed them from the cellar, "I do not know how the bank can thank you or repay you. There is no doubt that you have detected and defeated in the most complete manner one of the most determined attempts at bank robbery that have ever come within my experience."

                                                "I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr. John Clay," said Holmes. "I have been at some small expense over this matter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I am amply repaid by having had an experience which is in many ways unique, and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of the Red-headed League."

                                                "You see, Watson," he explained in the early hours of the morning as we sat over a glass of whisky and soda in Baker Street, "it was perfectly obvious from the first that the only possible object of this rather fantastic business of the advertisement of the League, and the copying of the Encyclopaedia, must be to get this not over-bright pawnbroker out of the way for a number of hours every day. It was a curious way of managing it, but, really, it would be difficult to suggest a better. The method was no doubt suggested to Clay's ingenious mind by the colour of his accomplice's hair. The $4 a week was a lure which must draw him, and what was it to them, who were playing for thousands? They put in the advertisement, one rogue has the temporary office, the other rogue incites the man to apply for it, and together they manage to secure his absence every morning in the week. From the time that I heard of the assistant having come for half wages, it was obvious to me that he had some strong motive for securing the situation."

                                                "But how could you guess what the motive was?"

                                                "Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a mere vulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of the question. The man's business was a small one, and there was nothing in his house which could account for such elaborate preparations, and such an expenditure as they were at. It must, then, be something out of the house. What could it be? I thought of the assistant's fondness for photography, and his trick of vanishing into the cellar. The cellar! There was the end of this tangled clue. Then I made inquiries as to this mysterious assistant and found that I had to deal with one of the coolest and most daring criminals in London. He was doing something in the cellar--something which took many hours a day for months on end. What could it be, once more? I could think of nothing save that he was running a tunnel to some other building.

                                                "So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. I surprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I was ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind. It was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the assistant answered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had never set eyes upon each other before. I hardly looked at his face. His knees were what I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked how worn, wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours of burrowing. The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for. I walked round the corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted on our friend's premises, and felt that I had solved my problem. When you drove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard and upon the chairman of the bank directors, with the result that you have seen."

                                                "And how could you tell that they would make their attempt to-night?" I asked.

                                                "Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that they cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson's presence--in other words, that they had completed their tunnel. But it was essential that they should use it soon, as it might be discovered, or the bullion might be removed. Saturday would suit them better than any other day, as it would give them two days for their escape. For all these reasons I expected them to come to-night."

                                                "You reasoned it out beautifully," I exclaimed in unfeigned admiration. "It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true."

                                                "It saved me from ennui," he answered, yawning. "Alas! I already feel it closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort to escape from the commonplaces of existence. These little problems help me to do so."

                                                "And you are a benefactor of the race," said I.

                                                He shrugged his shoulders. "Well, perhaps, after all, it is of some little use," he remarked. " 'L'homme c'est rien--l'oeuvre c'est tout,' as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George Sand."

                                                ADVENTURE  III.  A CASE OF IDENTITY


                                                "My dear fellow," said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side of the fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, "life is infinitely stranger than anything which the mind of man could invent. We would not dare to conceive the things which are really mere commonplaces of existence. If we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hover over this great city, gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the queer things which are going on, the strange coincidences, the plannings, the cross-purposes, the wonderful chains of events, working through generations, and leading to the most outre results, it would make all fiction with its conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most stale and unprofitable."

                                                "And yet I am not convinced of it," I answered. "The cases which come to light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough. We have in our police reports realism pushed to its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither fascinating nor artistic."

                                                "A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a realistic effect," remarked Holmes. "This is wanting in the police report, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of the magistrate than upon the details, which to an observer contain the vital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it, there is nothing so unnatural as the commonplace."

                                                I smiled and shook my head. "I can quite understand your thinking so." I said. "Of course, in your position of unofficial adviser and helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughout three continents, you are brought in contact with all that is strange and bizarre. But here"--I picked up the morning paper from the ground--"let us put it to a practical test. Here is the first heading upon which I come. 'A husband's cruelty to his wife.' There is half a column of print, but I know without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me. There is, of course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the sympathetic sister or landlady. The crudest of writers could invent nothing more crude."

                                                "Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument," said Holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it. "This is the Dundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged in clearing up some small points in connection with it. The husband was a teetotaler, there was no other woman, and the conduct complained of was that he had drifted into the habit of winding up every meal by taking out his false teeth and hurling them at his wife, which, you will allow, is not an action likely to occur to the imagination of the average story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff, Doctor, and acknowledge that I have scored over you in your example."

                                                He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in the centre of the lid. Its splendour was in such contrast to his homely ways and simple life that I could not help commenting upon it.

                                                "Ah," said he, "I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. It is a little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my assistance in the case of the Irene Adler papers."

                                                "And the ring?" I asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant which sparkled upon his finger.

                                                "It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in which I served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it even to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of my little problems."

                                                "And have you any on hand just now?" I asked with interest.

                                                "Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest. They are important, you understand, without being interesting. Indeed, I have found that it is usually in unimportant matters that there is a field for the observation, and for the quick analysis of cause and effect which gives the charm to an investigation. The larger crimes are apt to be the simpler, for the bigger the crime the more obvious, as a rule, is the motive. In these cases, save for one rather intricate matter which has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is nothing which presents any features of interest. It is possible, however, that I may have something better before very many minutes are over, for this is one of my clients, or I am much mistaken."

                                                He had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted blinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted London street. Looking over his shoulder, I saw that on the pavement opposite there stood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and a large curling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in a coquettish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her ear. From under this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at our windows, while her body oscillated backward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with her glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who leaves the bank, she hurried across the road, and we heard the sharp clang of the bell.

                                                "I have seen those symptoms before," said Holmes, throwing his cigarette into the fire. "Oscillation upon the pavement always means an affaire de coeur. She would like advice, but is not sure that the matter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even here we may discriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell wire. Here we may take it that there is a love matter, but that the maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or grieved. But here she comes in person to resolve our doubts."

                                                As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons entered to announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself loomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailed merchant-man behind a tiny pilot boat. Sherlock Holmes welcomed her with the easy courtesy for which he was remarkable, and, having closed the door and bowed her into an armchair, he looked her over in the minute and yet abstracted fashion which was peculiar to him.

                                                "Do you not find," he said, "that with your short sight it is a little trying to do so much typewriting?"

                                                "I did at first," she answered, "but now I know where the letters are without looking." Then, suddenly realising the full purport of his words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear and astonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. "You've heard about me, Mr. Holmes," she cried, "else how could you know all that?"s generally happens, Pierre did not feel the full effects of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          after they were over. After his liberation he reached Orel, and on the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          third day there, when preparing to go to Kiev, he fell ill and was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          laid up for three months. He had what the doctors termed "bilious
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          fever." But despite the fact that the doctors treated him, bled him,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and gave him medicines to drink, he recovered.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Scarcely any impression was left on Pierre's mind by all that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          happened to him from the time of his rescue till his illness. He
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          remembered only the dull gray weather now rainy and now snowy,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          internal physical distress, and pains in his feet and side. He
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          remembered a general impression of the misfortunes and sufferings of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          people and of being worried by the curiosity of officers and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          generals who questioned him, he also remembered his difficulty in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          procuring a conveyance and horses, and above all he remembered his
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          incapacity to think and feel all that time. On the day of his rescue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          he had seen the body of Petya Rostov. That same day he had learned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          that Prince Andrew, after surviving the battle of Borodino for more
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          than a month had recently died in the Rostovs' house at Yaroslavl, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Denisov who told him this news also mentioned Helene's death,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          supposing that Pierre had heard of it long before. All this at the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          time seemed merely strange to Pierre: he felt he could not grasp its
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          significance. Just then he was only anxious to get away as quickly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          as possible from places where people were killing one another, to some
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          peaceful refuge where he could recover himself, rest, and think over
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          all the strange new facts he had learned; but on reaching Orel he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          immediately fell ill. When he came to himself after his illness he saw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in attendance on him two of his servants, Terenty and Vaska, who had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          come from Moscow; and also his cousin the eldest princess, who had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          been living on his estate at Elets and hearing of his rescue and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          illness had come to look after him.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          It was only gradually during his convalescence that Pierre lost
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the impressions he had become accustomed to during the last few months
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and got used to the idea that no one would oblige him to go anywhere
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tomorrow, that no one would deprive him of his warm bed, and that he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          would be sure to get his dinner, tea, and supper. But for a long
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          time in his dreams he still saw himself in the conditions of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          captivity. In the same way little by little he came to understand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the news he had been told after his rescue, about the death of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Prince Andrew, the death of his wife, and the destruction of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          French.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A joyous feeling of freedom--that complete inalienable freedom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          natural to man which he had first experienced at the first halt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          outside Moscow--filled Pierre's soul during his convalescence. He
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          was surprised to find that this inner freedom, which was independent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of external conditions, now had as it were an additional setting of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          external liberty. He was alone in a strange town, without
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          acquaintances. No one demanded anything of him or sent him anywhere.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          He had all he wanted: the thought of his wife which had been a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          continual torment to him was no longer there, since she was no more.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "Oh, how good! How splendid!" said he to himself when a cleanly laid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          table was moved up to him with savory beef tea, or when he lay down
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          for the night on a soft clean bed, or when he remembered that the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          French had gone and that his wife was no more. "Oh, how good, how
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          splendid!"

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          And by old habit he asked himself the question: "Well, and what
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          then? What am I going to do?" And he immediately gave himself the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          answer: "Well, I shall live. Ah, how splendid!"

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          The very question that had formerly tormented him, the thing he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          had continually sought to find--the aim of life--no longer existed for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          him now. That search for the aim of life had not merely disappeared
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          temporarily--he felt that it no longer existed for him and could not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          present itself again. And this very absence of an aim gave him the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          complete, joyous sense of freedom which constituted his happiness at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          this time.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          He could not see an aim, for he now had faith--not faith in any kind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of rule, or words, or ideas, but faith in an ever-living,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ever-manifest God. Formerly he had sought Him in aims he set
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          himself. That search for an aim had been simply a search for God,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and suddenly in his captivity he had learned not by words or reasoning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          but by direct feeling what his nurse had told him long ago: that God
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is here and everywhere. In his captivity he had learned that in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Karataev God was greater, more infinite and unfathomable than in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Architect of the Universe recognized by the Freemasons. He felt like a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          man who after straining his eyes to see into the far distance finds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          what he sought at his very feet. All his life he had looked over the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          heads of the men around him, when he should have merely looked in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          front of him without straining his eyes.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          In the past he had never been able to find that great inscrutable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          infinite something. He had only felt that it must exist somewhere
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and had looked for it. In everything near and comprehensible he had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          only what was limited, petty, commonplace, and senseless. He had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          equipped himself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          where petty worldliness hiding itself in misty distance had seemed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to him great and infinite merely because it was not clearly seen.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          And such had European life, politics, Freemasonry, philosophy, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          philanthropy seemed to him. But even then, at moments of weakness as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          he had accounted them, his mind had penetrated to those distances
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and he had there seen the same pettiness, worldliness, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          senselessness. Now, however, he had learned to see the great, eternal,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and infinite in everything, and therefore--to see it and enjoy its
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          contemplation--he naturally threw away the telescope through which
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          he had till now gazed over men's heads, and gladly regarded the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ever-changing, eternally great, unfathomable, and infinite life around
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          him. And the closer he looked the more tranquil and happy he became.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          That dreadful question, "What for?" which had formerly destroyed all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          his mental edifices, no longer existed for him. To that question,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "What for?" a simple answer was now always ready in his soul: "Because
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          there is a God, that God without whose will not one hair falls from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a man's head."In external ways Pierre had hardly changed at all. In appearance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        he was just what he used to be. As before he was absent-minded and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        seemed occupied not with what was before his eyes but with something
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        special of his own. The difference between his former and present self
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        was that formerly when he did not grasp what lay before him or was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        said to him, he had puckered his forehead painfully as if vainly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        seeking to distinguish something at a distance. At present he still
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        forgot what was said to him and still did not see what was before
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        his eyes, but he now looked with a scarcely perceptible and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        seemingly ironic smile at what was before him and listened to what was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        said, though evidently seeing and hearing something quite different.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Formerly he had appeared to be a kindhearted but unhappy man, and so
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        people had been inclined to avoid him. Now a smile at the joy of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        life always played round his lips, and sympathy for others, shone in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        his eyes with a questioning look as to whether they were as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        contented as he was, and people felt pleased by his presence.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Previously he had talked a great deal, grew excited when he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        talked, and seldom listened; now he was seldom carried away in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        conversation and knew how to listen so that people readily told him
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        their most intimate secrets.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The princess, who had never liked Pierre and had been particularly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        hostile to him since she had felt herself under obligations to him
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        after the old count's death, now after staying a short time in Orel-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        where she had come intending to show Pierre that in spite of his
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ingratitude she considered it her duty to nurse him--felt to her
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        surprise and vexation that she had become fond of him. Pierre did
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        not in any way seek her approval, he merely studied her with interest.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Formerly she had felt that he regarded her with indifference and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        irony, and so had shrunk into herself as she did with others and had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        shown him only the combative side of her nature; but now he seemed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to be trying to understand the most intimate places of her heart, and,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mistrustfully at first but afterwards gratefully, she let him see
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the hidden, kindly sides of her character.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The most cunning man could not have crept into her confidence more
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        successfully, evoking memories of the best times of her youth and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        showing sympathy with them. Yet Pierre's cunning consisted simply in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        finding pleasure in drawing out the human qualities of the embittered,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        hard, and (in her own way) proud princess.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "Yes, he is a very, very kind man when he is not under the influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of bad people but of people such as myself," thought she.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        His servants too--Terenty and Vaska--in their own way noticed the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        change that had taken place in Pierre. They considered that he had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        become much "simpler." Terenty, when he had helped him undress and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wished him good night, often lingered with his master's boots in his
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        hands and clothes over his arm, to see whether he would not start a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        talk. And Pierre, noticing that Terenty wanted a chat, generally
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        kept him there.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "Well, tell me... now, how did you get food?" he would ask.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        And Terenty would begin talking of the destruction of Moscow, and of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the old count, and would stand for a long time holding the clothes and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        talking, or sometimes listening to Pierre's stories, and then would go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        out into the hall with a pleasant sense of intimacy with his master
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and affection for him.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The doctor who attended Pierre and visited him every day, though
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        he considered it his duty as a doctor to pose as a man whose every
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        moment was of value to suffering humanity, would sit for hours with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pierre telling him his favorite anecdotes and his observations on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the characters of his patients in general, and especially of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ladies.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "It's a pleasure to talk to a man like that; he is not like our
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        provincials," he would say.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        There were several prisoners from the French army in Orel, and the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        doctor brought one of them, a young Italian, to see Pierre.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        This officer began visiting Pierre, and the princess used to make
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fun of the tenderness the Italian expressed for him.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The Italian seemed happy only when he could come to see Pierre, talk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        with him, tell him about his past, his life at home, and his love, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pour out to him his indignation against the French and especially
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        against Napoleon.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "If all Russians are in the least like you, it is sacrilege to fight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        such a nation," he said to Pierre. "You, who have suffered so from the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        French, do not even feel animosity toward them."

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pierre had evoked the passionate affection of the Italian merely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        by evoking the best side of his nature and taking a pleasure in so
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        doing.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        During the last days of Pierre's stay in Orel his old Masonic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        acquaintance Count Willarski, who had introduced him to the lodge in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1807, came to see him. Willarski was married to a Russian heiress
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        who had a large estate in Orel province, and he occupied a temporary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        post in the commissariat department in that town.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Hearing that Bezukhov was in Orel, Willarski, though they had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        never been intimate, came to him with the professions of friendship
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and intimacy that people who meet in a desert generally express for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        one another. Willarski felt dull in Orel and was pleased to meet a man
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of his own circle and, as he supposed, of similar interests.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        But to his surprise Willarski soon noticed that Pierre had lagged
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        much behind the times, and had sunk, as he expressed it to himself,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        into apathy and egotism.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "You are letting yourself go, my dear fellow," he said.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        But for all that Willarski found it pleasanter now than it had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        been formerly to be with Pierre, and came to see him every day. To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pierre as he looked at and listened to Willarski, it seemed strange to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        think that he had been like that himself but a short time before.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Willarski was a married man with a family, busy with his family
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        affairs, his wife's affairs, and his official duties. He regarded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        all these occupations as hindrances to life, and considered that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        they were all contemptible because their aim was the welfare of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        himself and his family. Military, administrative, political, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Masonic interests continually absorbed his attention. And Pierre,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        without trying to change the other's views and without condemning him,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        but with the quiet, joyful, and amused smile now habitual to him,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        was interested in this strange though very familiar phenomenon.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        There was a new feature in Pierre's relations with Willarski, with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the princess, with the doctor, and with all the people he now met,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        which gained for him the general good will. This was his
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        acknowledgment of the impossibility of changing a man's convictions by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        words, and his recognition of the possibility of everyone thinking,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        feeling, and seeing things each from his own point of view. This
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        legitimate peculiarity of each individual which used to excite and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        irritate Pierre now became a basis of the sympathy he felt for, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the interest he took in, other people. The difference, and sometimes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        complete contradiction, between men's opinions and their lives, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        between one man and another, pleased him and drew from him an amused
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and gentle smile.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        In practical matters Pierre unexpectedly felt within himself a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        center of gravity he had previously lacked. Formerly all pecuniary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        questions, especially requests for money to which, as an extremely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wealthy man, he was very exposed, produced in him a state of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        hopeless agitation and perplexity. "To give or not to give?" he had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        asked himself. "I have it and he needs it. But someone else needs it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        still more. Who needs it most? And perhaps they are both impostors?"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        In the old days he had been unable to find a way out of all these
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        surmises and had given to all who asked as long as he had anything
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to give. Formerly he had been in a similar state of perplexity with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        regard to every question concerning his property, when one person
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        advised one thing and another something else.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Now to his surprise he found that he no longer felt either doubt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        or perplexity about these questions. There was now within him a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        judge who by some rule unknown to him decided what should or should
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        not be done.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        He was as indifferent as heretofore to money matters, but now he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        felt certain of what ought and what ought not to be done. The first
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        time he had recourse to his new judge was when a French prisoner, a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        colonel, came to him and, after talking a great deal about his
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        exploits, concluded by making what amounted to a demand that Pierre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        should give him four thousand francs to send to his wife and children.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pierre refused without the least difficulty or effort, and was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        afterwards surprised how simple and easy had been what used to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        appear so insurmountably difficult. At the same time that he refused
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the colonel's demand he made up his mind that he must have recourse to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        artifice when leaving Orel, to induce the Italian officer to accept
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        some money of which he was evidently in need. A further proof to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pierre of his own more settled outlook on practical matters was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        furnished by his decision with regard to his wife's debts and to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rebuilding of his houses in and near Moscow.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        His head steward came to him at Orel and Pierre reckoned up with him
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        his diminished income. The burning of Moscow had cost him, according
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to the head steward's calculation, about two million rubles.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        To console Pierre for these losses the head steward gave him an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        estimate showing that despite these losses his income would not be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        diminished but would even be increased if he refused to pay his wife's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        debts which he was under no obligation to meet, and did not rebuild
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        his Moscow house and the country house on his Moscow estate, which had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cost him eighty thousand rubles a year and brought in nothing.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "Yes, of course that's true," said Pierre with a cheerful smile.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "I don't need all that at all. By being ruined I have become much
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        richer."

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        But in January Savelich came from Moscow and gave him an account
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of the state of things there, and spoke of the estimate an architect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        had made of the cost of rebuilding the town and country houses,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        speaking of this as of a settled matter. About the same time he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        received letters from Prince Vasili and other Petersburg acquaintances
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        speaking of his wife's debts. And Pierre decided that the steward's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        proposals which had so pleased him were wrong and that he must go to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Petersburg and settle his wife's affairs and must rebuild in Moscow.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Why this was necessary he did not know, but he knew for certain that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        it was necessary. His income would be reduced by three fourths, but he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        felt it must be done.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Willarski was going to Moscow and they agreed to travel together.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        During the whole time of his convalescence in Orel Pierre had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        experienced a feeling of joy, freedom, and life; but when during his
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        journey he found himself in the open world and saw hundreds of new
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        faces, that feeling was intensified. Throughout his journey he felt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        like a schoolboy on holiday. Everyone--the stagecoach driver, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        post-house overseers, the peasants on the roads and in the villages-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        had a new significance for him. The presence and remarks of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Willarski who continually deplored the ignorance and poverty of Russia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and its backwardness compared with Europe only heightened Pierre's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pleasure. Where Willarski saw deadness Pierre saw an extraordinary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        strength and vitality--the strength which in that vast space amid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the snows maintained the life of this original, peculiar, and unique
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        people. He did not contradict Willarski and even seemed to agree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        with him--an apparent agreement being the simplest way to avoid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        discussions that could lead to nothing--and he smiled joyfully as he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        listened to him.